john carpenter's "the thing" was a flop on release. audiences hated it and critics dismissed it. "'the thing' is basically, then, just a geek show, a gross-out movie in which teenagers can dare one another to watch the screen," roger ebert wrote in his review. it is "too phony looking to be disgusting," vincent canby wrote in the new york times. "it qualifies only as instant junk." "the thing" has, in the decades since its release, become a cult classic. because october is horror movie month in the bouie household, i recently rewatched "the thing," which is actually an adaptation of the 1938 john w. campbell jr. short story "who goes there?" campbell's story had been adapted decades earlier, in 1951, as "the thing from another world," with huge liberties taken with the source material. carpenter's version is much more faithful to the original text, especially in how it embraces the lovecraftian elements of the story, from the utterly desolate arctic setting and ancient evil to the grotesque tentacled creatures (or really, singular creature) that terrorize our protagonists. if you've never seen the film or don't know the story, the premise is straightforward. on an isolated research station in the depths of antarctica, a group of researchers encounters an alien being, many thousands of years old, that can assimilate and mimic any living organism while retaining its own biomass, enabling it to infect and assimilate others. it quickly assimilates a member of the research team, sparking a paranoid search to root out and destroy "the thing" before it can reach civilization. carpenter's film begins with "the thing" arriving at an american research station in antarctica after escaping the norwegian researchers who had discovered it. taking the form of a dog, "the thing" takes shelter with the americans, before it reveals itself and begins to stalk and assimilate the men at the base. the film is famous for its intricate creature design. the principal effects artist, rob bottin, conceived of "the thing" as something with no set structure. instead, it could transform into anything it had ever assimilated. the results, onscreen, are some of the most disturbing monsters ever put to film. humans and animals, twisted into undulating, multi-armed horrors; heads and torsos opening up to reveal ravenous beasts; individual limbs sprouting legs and tentacles, searching for new hosts. the creature designs are nightmarish. but what makes "the thing" compelling -- what makes it one of the scariest films i've ever seen -- is the claustrophobic dread that settles in to every scene like a dense cloud of fog. you don't actually see "the thing" all that often. the tension of the film comes from the sickening realization, among the characters, that it is nearly impossible to know if they or anyone else has been assimilated. in short order, the men (and they're all men) turn on one another, consumed by fear, madness and paranoia. and they become, as such, easy targets for "the thing," which is trying to escape the isolation of the antarctic to reach an entire planet of potential hosts. for as much as critics dismissed the film as expensive trash, there is an idea here: that fear and paranoia can dissolve the bonds of friendship, camaraderie and citizenship. that they can sap us of our ability to work together and paralyze us in the face of crisis. it is an idea which, in our age of misinformation, public distrust and pandemic disease, lands with heavy force. here i am reminded of one scene from an early point in the film, before all hell breaks loose but after they've encountered "the thing." kurt russell's character, r.j. macready, records his thoughts so that a record remains for whoever might find them and the base. "nobody trusts anybody now," he says. "and we're all very tired." i often think the reception a film receives is related to the overall mood of the culture at the time of its release. it's obvious that carpenter's nihilism -- his vision of an incomprehensible and unstoppable evil -- was at odds with the sunny optimism of ronald reagan's america. it is not for nothing that steven spielberg's "e.t. the extra-terrestrial" came out the same year to much greater success. but it's not just the nihilism that rubbed audiences the wrong way. "the thing," in its bleak, despairing way, stood against the hyper-individualism of the era, embodied in the action heroics of the decade. for carpenter, there are some things that cannot be defeated with simple brute force. some things require us to cooperate, collaborate and trust one another, lest we destroy ourselves. i used joe manchin's opposition to joe biden's expansion of the child tax credit to talk about the new deal, the welfare state and the idea of "market dependency." i was also a guest host of "the ezra klein show." in my two episodes, i chatted with the historians woody holton and martha jones. michael hobbes on our modern moral panics, in his substack newsletter. gerald horne on the trinidadian historian and politician eric williams for the nation. phillip maciak on the recent spate of vampire fiction for the los angeles review of books. sophie gilbert reviews a new documentary on the jan. 6 insurrection for the atlantic. rebecca pierce on sarah silverman for jewish currents. feedback if you're enjoying what you're reading, please consider recommending it to your friends. they can sign up here. if you want to share your thoughts on an item in this week's newsletter or on the newsletter in general, please email me at jamelle-newsletter@nytimes.com. you can follow me on twitter (@jbouie) and instagram. just a photo of my favorite bookstore in charlottesville, va. we're not big pasta eaters but we do like this. it's simple and tasty, and goes great with a light salad. recipe from nyt cooking. ingredients directions pulse tomatoes with juice in a food processor to a coarse puree. put a large pot of water on to boil. in a large heavy skillet, heat 2 tablespoons olive oil over medium heat and add yellow pepper. cook, stirring often, until tender, 5 to 8 minutes. add garlic, thyme and red pepper flakes. cook, stirring, until fragrant, 30 seconds to a minute. add tomatoes, sugar and salt to taste, and turn up heat to medium-high. when tomatoes begin to bubble briskly and sputter, turn heat to medium. cook, stirring often, until tomatoes have cooked down to a fragrant, thick sauce, about 15 minutes. add olives, black pepper and basil; stir together, taste and adjust seasoning. heat oven to 350 degrees. oil a 2 1/2 - to 3-quart baking dish or gratin with olive oil. when water in pot comes to a boil, salt generously and add rigatoni. cook al dente, removing from the water 1 minute sooner than indicated in the package instructions. (reserve some of the cooking water.) transfer pasta to a large bowl. if the tomato sauce seems very thick, thin out as desired with 2 to 4 tablespoons pasta cooking water. scrape into bowl with pasta, add cheeses and toss well. scrape into prepared baking dish. drizzle remaining 1 tablespoon olive oil over the top. cover with foil. bake 25 minutes. uncover and continue to bake another 5 to 10 minutes, until bubbly and beginning to brown in spots. serve hot.
