as recently as 1984, abortion was not a deeply partisan issue. "the difference in support for the pro-choice position was a mere six percentage points," alan abramowitz, a political scientist at emory university, told me by email. "40 percent of democratic identifiers were pro-life, while 39 percent were pro-choice. among republican identifiers, 33 percent were pro-choice, 45 percent were pro-life and 22 percent were in the middle." by 2020, abramowitz continued, this split was even wider, 59 points, among "strong partisans, the group most likely to vote in primary elections," abramowitz said. crucially, abramowitz pointed out, opinions on abortion are also closely connected with racial attitudes: some of the scholars and journalists studying the evolving role of abortion in american politics make the case that key leaders of the conservative movement in the late 1970s and early 1980s -- among them richard viguerie, paul weyrich, phyllis schlafly and jerry falwell sr. -- were seeking to expand their base beyond those opposed to the civil rights movement. according to this argument, conservative strategists settled on a concerted effort to politicize abortion in part because it dodged the race issue and offered the opportunity to unify conservative catholics and evangelicals. "the anti-abortion movement has been remarkably successful at convincing observers that the positions individuals take on the abortion issue always follow in a deductive way from their supposed moral principles. they don't," katherine stewart, the author of the 2019 book "the power worshipers," wrote in an email. in 1978, the hostile reaction to an i.r.s. proposal to impose taxes on churches running segregated private schools ("seg academies" for the children of white southerners seeking to avoid federally mandated school integration orders) provided the opportunity to mobilize born again and evangelical parishioners through the creation of the moral majority. as stewart argues, viguerie, weyrich and others on the right were determined to find an issue that could bring together a much larger constituency: after long and contentious debate, conservative strategists came to a consensus, stewart writes: "they landed upon the one surprising word that would supply the key to the political puzzle of the age: 'abortion.'" in an email, stewart expanded on her argument. abortion opponents: abortion is among the most intractable issues dividing the parties, with little or no room for compromise. on one side, opponents of the procedure argue that "at the moment of fusion of human sperm and egg, a new entity comes into existence which is distinctly human, alive, and an individual organism -- a living, and fully human, being," as the center for human dignity puts it in the pamphlet "the best pro-life arguments for secular audiences." on the other side, abortion rights proponents contend, in the words of the center for reproductive rights: "laws that restrict abortion have the effect and purpose of preventing a woman from exercising any of her human rights or fundamental freedoms on a basis of equality with men." it wasn't always this way. fifty years ago, the southern baptist convention meeting in st. louis approved what by the standards of 1971 was a decisively liberal resolution on abortion: this year, at a june meeting in nashville, the convention demonstrated just how much has changed on the religious right when it comes to abortion. members endorsed a resolution declaring, "we affirm that the murder of preborn children is a crime against humanity that must be punished equally under the law," pointedly repudiating past equivocation on the issue: randall balmer, a professor of religion at dartmouth and the author of a new book, "bad faith: race and the rise of the religious right," looked at conservative strategizing in a recent op-ed in the guardian. in his essay, balmer recounted a 1990 meeting of conservatives in washington at which weyrich spoke: in an email, balmer wrote, "opposition to abortion became a convenient diversion -- a godsend, really -- to distract from what actually motivated their political activism: the defense of racial segregation in evangelical institutions." the same is true, ballmer continued, of many politicians who have become adamant foes of abortion: the reality in the 1970s was that the surging rights movements -- rights for african americans, women's rights, reproductive rights, gay rights, rights for criminal defendants and for the mentally ill -- had set the stage for what would become an explosive conservative reaction, a reaction that by the 1980 elections put ronald reagan in the white house for eight years, wrested control of the senate from democrats and elected a coalition of republicans and conservative democrats that wielded tremendous power in the house. "there is a persistent association between abortion views and ethnoracial exclusion," bart bonikowski, a professor of sociology at n.y.u., wrote in an email: david leege, emeritus professor of political science at notre dame, has an additional explanation for the process linking racial animosity and abortion. in an email, he wrote: in short, leege wrote, "although the policy domain may differ, the hated people are the same." michele margolis, a professor of political science at the university of pennsylvania, in her 2018 book "from politics to the pews: how partisanship and the political environment shape religious identity," argues that "instead of religiosity driving political attitudes, the shifting political landscape -- in which republicans have become associated with religious values and cultural conservatism to a greater extent than democrats -- could have instead changed partisans' involvement with their religious communities." if, margolis continues: the power of partisanship to influence stands on abortion can be seen on the democratic side by the "host of democrats who have liberalized their views as they eyed the presidency -- ted kennedy, jesse jackson, dick gephardt, al gore, and dennis kucinich among them" -- as john murdock wrote in "the future of the pro-life democrat" in the journal national affairs. rachel rebouche, a law professor at temple, adds nuance to the argument that abortion serves as a roundabout vehicle to appeal to racial conservatives. instead, she contends that anti-abortion and segregation are "explicit co-travelers, to be sure. but i think they also have different chronological origins and somewhat different original audiences." abortion, she wrote by email, and "sex control, gender identities and patriarchy" are a set of "very strong themes that developed alongside private schools, with their ability to shape views of religion, sex, culture and race, and alongside welfare reform and criminal law enforcement, which always have had race at the center of those systems." in addition, rebouche wrote, "where i see synergies are conservative politics aligning with ideas about sex, sexuality, religion, family." jefferson cowie, a historian at vanderbilt, argued in an email that "there are three dimensions to the question of abortion." the first, he notes: the second, he continued, is: the third, in cowie's view, is: darren dochuk, a professor of history at notre dame and the author of "from bible belt to sunbelt: plain-folk religion, grassroots politics and the rise of evangelical conservatism," argued in an email that the strength of the opposition to abortion in the south grows out of the unique tensions in the region between notions of manhood and evangelical attempts to control the sins of men: "since the late 1970s, however," dochuk wrote: this accommodation is driven, according to dochuk, by the fact that the enemy is now, in southern evangelicals' view, "an effeminate liberalism and its 'secular humanism,'" which, in turn, means that: in this milieu, dochuk observed: in milder terms, rebecca kreitzer, a professor of public policy at the university of north carolina at chapel hill, and two colleagues argue in "the evolution of morality policy debate: moralization and demoralization" that as an issue becomes both polarized and "moralized," it become more difficult, if not impossible, to resolve. in contrast, when an issue become "demoralized," as has been the case with gay marriage over the past two decades, it becomes increasingly likely to reach bipartisan consensus. for 20 years, gallup has asked, "regardless of whether or not you think it should be legal, please tell me whether you personally believe that in general gay and lesbian relations are morally acceptable or morally wrong." in 2001, 53 percent said morally wrong and 40 percent said morally acceptable. by 2021, however, 69 percent said gay and lesbian relations were morally acceptable compared with 30 percent who described such relations as morally unacceptable. the issue has been "demoralized" and has effectively disappeared from the national debate. no such luck in the case of abortion. over the same 20 years, gallup asked whether abortion is morally acceptable or unacceptable. in 2001, 42 percent said the procedure is morally acceptable and 45 percent said morally unacceptable. over those two decades, the numbers varied modestly year to year but effectively changed very little: in 2021, 47 percent said acceptable, 46 percent said unacceptable. the bottom line: for at least the medium term, the abortion issue is here to stay. if anything, the supreme court 5-4 decision on sept. 1 to refuse to block a texas law prohibiting most abortions demonstrated that the issue will remain on center stage with no resolution in sight.
