there is no question that out-and-out racism and a longing to return to the days of white supremacy were high on the list of motivations of the pro-trump mob that ransacked the capitol on jan. 6. that should not end the discussion about why it happened, though. there are other questions we need to ask that do not (and could never) justify the violence and mayhem but seek instead to help us gain further insight into the lethal force that attacked congress a week ago and is poised to strike again. it may sound trivial at first, in light of what happened, but how important is the frustration among what pollsters call non-college white men at not being able to compete with those higher up on the socioeconomic ladder because of educational disadvantage? how critical is declining value in marriage -- or mating -- markets? does any of that really matter? how toxic is the combination of pessimism and anger that stems from a deterioration in standing and authority? what might engender existential despair, this sense of irretrievable loss? how hard is it for any group, whether it is racial, political or ethnic, to come to terms with losing power and status? what encourages desperate behavior and a willingness to believe a pack of lies? i posed these questions to a wide range of experts. this column explores their replies. bart bonikowski, a professor of sociology at n.y.u., was forthright: there is evidence that many non-college white americans who have been undergoing what psychiatrists call "involuntary subordination" or "involuntary defeat" both resent and mourn their loss of centrality and what they perceive as their growing invisibility. andrew cherlin, a sociologist at johns hopkins university, wrote by email: cherlin pointed to the assertion of a 67-year-old retired landscaper from north carolina who joined the trump loyalists on jan. 6 on the steps of the capitol: "we are here. see us! notice us! pay attention!" white supremacy and frank racism are prime motivators, and they combined with other elements to fuel the insurrection: a groundswell of anger directed specifically at elites and an addictive lust for revenge against those they see as the agents of their disempowerment. it is this admixture of factors that makes the insurgency that wrested control of the house and senate so dangerous -- and is likely to spark new forms of violence in the future. each of the forces at work has helped drive millions of white voters to the right: working in tandem, they collectively provide the tinder for the destructive behavior we saw last week in the chambers of the united states congress. "it is very, very difficult for individuals and groups to come to terms with losing status and power," cameron anderson, a professor at berkeley's haas school of business, wrote by email. while most acute among those possessing high status and power, anderson said, dacher keltner, a professor of psychology at berkeley, agrees in large part with anderson, describing the fury and disappointment contributing to the takeover of congress as concentrated among whites who see their position in the social order on a downward path. in an email, keltner wrote: when pressed to give up power, he added, "these types of individuals will resort to violence, and to refashioning history to suggest they did not lose." in a september 2020 paper, "theories of power: perceived strategies for gaining and maintaining power," keltner and leanne ten brinke, a professor of psychology at the university of british columbia, argue that "lower class individuals experience greater vigilance to threat, relative to high status individuals, leading them to perceive greater hostility in their environment." this increased vigilance, brinke and keltner continue, creates in other words, resentment toward successful white elites is in play here, as evidenced by the attack on congress, an overwhelmingly white seat of power. before trump, many of those who became his supporters suffered from what carol graham, a senior fellow at brookings, describes as pervasive "unhappiness, stress and lack of hope" without a narrative to legitimate their condition: in a december 2020 brookings paper, graham and sergio pinto, a doctoral student at the university of maryland, wrote that what, however, could prompt a mob -- including not only members of the proud boys and the boogaloo bois but also many seemingly ordinary americans drawn to trump -- to break into the capitol? one possible answer: a mutated form of moral certitude based on the belief that one's decline in social and economic status is the result of unfair, if not corrupt, decisions by others, especially by so-called elites. in "the social and political implications of moral conviction," linda j. skitka and g. scott morgan, psychology professors at university of illinois-chicago and drew university, wrote that "although moral conviction motivates any number of normatively positive behaviors (e.g., voting, political engagement), moral conviction appears to also have a potential dark side." skitka and morgan argued that: alan page fiske, a professor of anthropology at u.c.l.a., and tage shakti rai, a research associate at the mit sloan school of management, make a parallel argument in their book "virtuous violence," in which they write that violence is: "most violence," fiske and rai contend, "is morally motivated." a key factor working in concert to aggravate the anomie and disgruntlement in many members of trump's white working-class base is their inability to obtain a college education, a limitation that blocks access to higher paying jobs and lowers their supposed "value" in marriage markets. in their paper "trends in educational assortative marriage from 1940 to 2003," christine r. schwartz and robert d. mare, professors of sociology at the university of wisconsin and the university of california-los angeles, wrote that the "most striking" data in their research, "is the decline in odds that those with very low levels of education marry up." in the bottom ranks of educational achievement, they continued, trends in inequality are christopher federico, a professor of political science and psychology at the university of minnesota, described the key roles of education and employment opportunity in the right-wing mobilization of less-educated white men: in this new world, federico argues, "promises of broad-based economic security" were replaced by a job market where the result, federico notes, is that "group consciousness is likely to emerge on the basis of education and training" and when "those with less education see themselves as being culturally very different from an educated stratum of the population that is more socially liberal and cosmopolitan, then the sense of group conflict is deepened." none of these forces diminishes the key role of racial animosity and racism. instead, they intensify racial resentment. jennifer richeson, a professor of psychology at yale, wrote by email that there is trump, richeson continued, michael kraus, a professor at the yale school of management, argued in an email that emily g. jacobs, a professor of psychological and brain sciences at the university of california-santa barbara, argued that all the rights revolutions -- civil rights, women's rights, gay rights -- have been key to the emergence of the contemporary right wing: jane yunhee junn, a professor of political science at the university of southern california, was outspoken in her view: herbert p. kitschelt, a professor of political science at duke, wrote in an email that "compared to other advanced countries caught up in the transition to knowledge society, the united states appears to be in a much more vulnerable position to a strong right-wing populist challenge." kitschelt's listing of some of the reasons for american vulnerability to right-wing forces illuminates current events. first, kitschelt noted, another key factor, kitschelt pointed out, is that unlike most european countries, kitschelt wrote, on top of that, in the united states. coming days will determine how far this goes, but for the moment the nation faces, for all intents and purposes, the makings of a civil insurgency. what makes this insurgency unusual in american history is that it is based on trump's false claim that he, not joe biden, won the presidency, that the election was stolen by malefactors in both parties, and that majorities in both branches of congress no longer represent the true will of the people. at the same time, hostility to trump on the left can make it easy to overlook the shortcomings, such as they are, of the center-left political coalition in this country -- and i think it is important that liberals, among whom i count myself, keep this in mind. bernard grofman, a political scientist at the university of california, irvine, put it this way in an email: president obama, grofman wrote, the result, according to grofman, was that "white less well-educated voters didn't desert the democratic party, the democratic party deserted them." at the same time, though, and here i will quote grofman at length: in the end, grofman said,
