it's impossible to understand the jan. 6 assault on the capitol without addressing the movement that has come to be known as christian nationalism. andrew l. whitehead and samuel l. perry, professors of sociology at indiana university-purdue university indianapolis and the university of oklahoma, describe christian nationalism in their book "taking america back for god": in her recent book, "the power worshippers: inside the dangerous rise of religious nationalism," katherine stewart, a frequent contributor to these pages, does not mince words: this, stewart writes, "is not a 'culture war.' it is a political war over the future of democracy." while much of the focus of coverage of the attack on the halls of the house and senate was on the violence, the religious dimension went largely unnoted (although my colleagues elizabeth dias and ruth graham made the connection). i asked perry about the role of the religious right, and he replied by email: "the capitol insurrection was as christian nationalist as it gets." perry elaborated: together, perry continued, the evidence the conservative evangelical pastor greg locke, the founder of the global vision bible church in mount juliet, tenn., epitomizes the mind-set perry describes. in his sept 2020 book, "this means war" locke writes, "we are one election away from losing everything we hold dear." the battle, locke continued, is "against everything evil and wicked in the world." it is on jan. 5, locke tweeted: along similar lines, tony perkins, president of the family research council and a leading figure among conservative evangelicals, was asked in a 2018 politico interview, "what happened to turning the other cheek?" "you know, you only have two cheeks," perkins replied. "look, christianity is not all about being a welcome mat which people can just stomp their feet on." robert jones, the founder and c.e.o. of p.r.r.i., a nonprofit organization that conducts research on religion and politics, argues in his book "white too long: the legacy of white supremacy in american christianity," that christianity in america has a long history of serving as a cloak for a racist political agenda. "the norms of white supremacy have become deeply and broadly integrated into white christian identity, operating far below the level of consciousness," jones writes. "the story of just how intractably white supremacy has become embedded in the dna of american christianity." on jan. 7, the mainstream baptist news published comments from 21 baptist leaders, including steve harmon, professor of theology at gardner-webb university school of divinity: charles kimball, a professor of religious studies at the university of oklahoma-norman, shares some of jones's concerns. in his 2002 book, "when religion becomes evil," kimball wrote: in an email, gerardo marti, a professor of sociology at davidson college, described a fundamental strategic shift among many on the religious right toward a more embattled, militantly conservative approach: marti contends that as a result, marti continues, revivalism has largely i asked philip gorski, a professor of sociology at yale and the author of the book "american covenant: a history of civil religion from the puritans to the present," if supporters of christian nationalism were a dominant force in the jan. 6 assault on congress. he replied: gorski described the christian nationalist movement as a loose confederation of people and institutions that share the narrative is propagated through a network of channels, gorski wrote: in addition, gorski said, it should be noted that jeffress went out of his way on the afternoon of jan. 6 to dissociate himself from the attack on the capitol. in a discussion of religion published at the immanent frame -- a forum of the social science research council -- gorski drew a sharp distinction between christian nationalism and traditional religion doctrine: in contrast, according to gorski, the american version of civil religion paul d. miller, a professor of international affairs at georgetown university's school of foreign service, reasons along parallel lines: christian nationalism reveals what benjamin lynerd, a professor of political science at christopher newport university and the author of "republican theology: the civil religion of american evangelicals," calls "the tragedy of evangelical politics, a tragedy that the unrestrained loyalty to president trump lays bare, but which stretches well beyond this moment in american history," when "political theology serves merely as cover for the more pragmatic agenda of social empowerment." there is a difference, lynerd writes, jones, the founder of p.r.r.i., made a related point in an email: those religious symbols, jones continued, many of those i contacted for this column described whitehead and perry's book, "taking america back for god," as the most authoritative study of christian nationalism. the two authors calculate that roughly 20 percent of adult americans qualify, in perry's words, as "true believers in christian nationalism." they estimate that 36 percent of republican voters qualify as christian nationalists. in 2016, the turnout rate among these voters was an exceptionally high 87 percent. whitehead wrote that "about 70 percent of those we identify as christian nationalists are white." a small percentage of african-americans qualify as christian nationalists, but perry pointed out that "it's obvious black and white americans are thinking of something completely different when they think about the nation's 'christian heritage.' " to ask white americans about restoring america's christian character, perry continued, samuel p. perry, a professor of communications at baylor -- and no relation to samuel l. perry -- argued on jan. 15 in an essay, "the capitol siege recalls past acts of christian nationalist violence," that the confrontations with federal law enforcement officials at ruby ridge, idaho in 1992 involving white supremacists and waco, texas in 1993 involving an extremist christian sect, together marked a key turning point in uniting white militias with the hard core christian right: in an email, perry followed up on this thought: "the insurrection or assault on the capitol involved unlikely coalitions of people in one way. you do not necessarily think of religious evangelicals and fundamentalists being in line with three percenters or proud boys," but, he continued, the the emergence of christian nationalism has in fact prompted the mobilization, in 2019, of a new group, christians against christian nationalism. the organization has lined up prominent religious leaders to serve as "endorsers," including the rev. dr. paul baxley of the cooperative baptist fellowship, sister simone campbell, the executive director of network and tony campolo, founder and leader of the evangelical association for the promotion of education. more than 16,000 ministers, pastors and parishioners have signed a statement that reads in part: in contrast, there is evidence, robert jones argues, that even though both christian nationalists and, more broadly, white evangelicals, are in decline as a share of the electorate, the two constituencies may become more, not less, assertive. jones noted that his data suggests that the more a group believes it is under siege from the larger culture, the more activated it becomes. some of the clearest evidence of this phenomenon lies in the continually rising level of election day turnout among white evangelicals, even as they decline as a share of the electorate. jones wrote: even more worrisome, in jones's view: unsurprisingly, the assertiveness of white evangelicals, and especially of christian nationalists, is activating their adversaries in the traditional moderate religious mainstream. the rise of the christian right is also feeding a tide of secularization that steadily thins the ranks of the religiously observant. david campbell, a political scientist at notre dame, further elaborates on jones's argument, writing in a june 2020 article, "the perils of politicized religion, that in other words, as members of the christian right have become angrier and more adversarial, some to the point of violence, their decline from dominant to marginal status has bred a provocative resentment that is serving to spur the very secularization processes that so infuriates them. if the evidence of the capitol attack and its aftermath is any guide, this vicious circle does not bode well for the future.
