do liberals or conservatives experience higher levels of satisfaction, happiness or meaning in life? is the left or the right more inclined to intolerance, bigotry or conspiratorial thinking? are democrats or republicans more loyal to family and friends? a wide range of scholars in a variety of disciplines are asking these questions and taking them seriously. ultimately, though, this line of inquiry raises an even broader question: whether liberals and conservatives function on fundamentally different moral planes. two similarly titled papers with markedly disparate conclusions illustrate the range of disagreement on this subject. "why are conservatives happier than liberals?" by jaime napier of n.y.u. in abu dhabi and john jost of n.y.u., and "conservatives are happier than liberals, but why?" by barry r. schlenker and john chambers, both of the university of florida, and bonnie le of the university of rochester. using nationally representative samples from the united states and nine other countries, napier and jost note that they napier and jost contend that their determinations are "consistent with system justification theory, which posits that viewing the status quo (with its attendant degree of inequality) as fair and legitimate serves a palliative function." one of napier and jost's studies "suggests that conservatism provides an emotional buffer against the negative hedonic impact of inequality in society." in addition, they argue that rising levels of inequality have "exacerbated the happiness gap between liberals and conservatives, apparently because conservatives (more than liberals) possess an ideological buffer." a very different view of conservatives and the political right emerges in schlenker, chambers and le's paper: in contrast to napier and jost's "view that conservatives are generally fearful, low in self-esteem, and rationalize away social inequality," schlenker, chambers and le argue: liberals, schlenker and his co-authors agree, they go on: these differences have consequences: so too, in their view, does the liberal inclination to view morality in relative, as opposed to absolutist, terms, have consequences: perhaps most significant, schlenker, chambers and le found that while both liberals and conservatives place a high value on fairness, they have diverging definitions of the concept: in "a neurology of the conservative-liberal dimension of political ideology," dr. mario f. mendez, a professor of neurology at u.c.l.a., argues: when comparing conservatives with liberals, mendez continues, "investigators report greater disgust sensitivity, especially for contamination disgust and violations of the sense of purity." "inducing disgust," mendez adds, "can heighten the sense of moral violations and shift moral judgments to the conservative side." political conservatism, he writes, is the debate over happiness touches on a host of subjects relevant to politics, including the almost universal goal of finding meaning in life. a 2018 paper, "conservatives report greater meaning in life than liberals," by david b. newman of the university of california-san francisco, norbert schwarz and arthur stone of the university of southern california, and jesse graham of the university of utah, contends that across five studies in an email, newman provided some explanation: "conservatism on social issues (e.g., abortion and same-sex marriage) was a stronger predictor of meaning in life, whereas conservatism on economic issues (e.g., free markets) was a stronger predictor of life satisfaction." a reason for this, newman continued, is that newman argued that since "family ties and a strong sense of community and connectedness are key ingredients for a meaningful life," it is possible that "if liberal agendas and ideologies inhibit social bonds and connections, it could lower people's sense of meaning and purpose." it's hardly surprising that there are scholars who disagree with the idea that conservatives experience a more satisfying sense of life's meaning than liberals. in "liberal and conservative political ideologies: different routes to happiness?" becky choma, michael busseri and stanley sadava argue that both strong liberals and strong conservatives achieve high levels of life satisfaction: emma onraet, alain van hiel and kristof dhont concluded in their paper "the relationship between right-wing ideological attitudes and psychological well-being" that a comprehensive examination -- a meta-analysis -- of previous studies involving 97 samples with 69,221 participants shows "that right-wing attitudes are only weakly related to psychological well-being" and that "our results thus do not support previous theories that claim that right-wing attitudes yield substantial relationships with psychological well-being." the onraet study did find, however, that "among the elderly, adhering to right-wing attitudes is associated with higher levels of self-esteem, intrinsic goal pursuit and (a trend toward higher) life satisfaction." why? onraet, van hiel and dhont provide a speculative answer: are conservatives or liberals more inclined to intolerance, prejudice and authoritarianism? jarret crawford, a professor of psychology at the college of new jersey and the lead author of "the balanced ideological antipathy model: explaining the effects of ideological attitudes on inter-group antipathy across the political spectrum," observed in an email that prejudice and intolerance can be found on both sides of the aisle: when it comes to denying political rights to specific groups, crawford continued, but, crawford stressed, looking at these issues from a different angle, michael steger, a professor of psychology at colorado state university, described in an email his views on meaning: because of this, steger continued, in terms of subjective feelings of satisfaction and accomplishment, conservatism has some built-in advantages over liberalism, steger argued: in terms of the search for meaning, steger wrote, conversely, for liberals, more open-mindedness and less certainty are steger said that he has studied those engaged "in the search for meaning" as opposed to those who already have a strong sense of meaning. generally, he writes, what, then, can be drawn from these conflicting analyses? first, be wary of the conclusion that conservatives are happier than liberals and that they find greater meaning in life. in "are conservatives really happier than liberals?," tom jacobs points out that jacobs cites the work of sean wojcik, a senior data scientist at axios, and peter ditto of the university of california, irvine, who find in their paper "conservative self-enhancement" that political conservatives have "a strengthened tendency to evaluate the self in an overly positive way." based on that research, wojcik, ditto and four colleagues argue in "conservatives report, but liberals display, greater happiness" that "research suggesting that political conservatives are happier than political liberals is fully mediated by conservatives' self-enhancing style of self-report." using what they call "behavioral measures," the authors found that perhaps the most thought-provoking statement on these issues comes from viktor frankl in "man's search for meaning," published in 1946, a year after frankl's liberation from a concentration camp. frankl contended that meaning in life comes through work, love and suffering, and that all these involve the subordination of self: the implication favors liberals. friedrich hayek, the author of "the road to serfdom," had his own perspective on the difference between liberals and conservatives: in "why liberalism works," paul starr, a professor of sociology and public affairs at princeton, puts the case for contemporary liberalism this way (and i am going to give him the last word):
