as republicans well know, democrats are divided on a host of volatile racial, cultural and sexual issues. take a look at the polls. in 2019, the democracy fund voter study group commissioned a survey asking for agreement or disagreement with the statement: "there are only two genders, male and female." in the full sample, a decisive majority, 59 percent agreed, including 43 percent who "strongly agreed," 32 percent disagreed and 9 percent who said they weren't sure. among republicans, it was no contest, 78 percent agreed and 16 percent disagreed. independents mirrored the whole sample. democrats were split: a plurality, 48 percent, disagreed, and 44 percent agreed. the survey itself arguably embodied what critics might call "transphobic framing" -- transgender issues are among the most polarizing in contemporary politics and much contemporary cultural conflict in fact stems from framing disputes. an august-september 2017 pew research survey asked respondents to choose between two statements: "whether a person is a man or a woman is determined at birth" and "whether a person is a man or a woman can be different from the sex at birth." a 54 percent majority of all those surveyed said sex "is determined at birth" and 44 percent said it "can be different from the sex at birth." republican voters and those who lean republican chose "at birth" 80 to 19. democratic voters and those who lean democratic said sex can be different from the sex at birth 64 to 34. or take the public's view of the "defund the police" movement that gained momentum after the murder of george floyd a year ago. a march 1-2 usa today/ipsos poll found that voters were opposed to defunding the police 58-18, with the strongest opposition among whites (67 percent to 13 percent support, the rest undecided) and republicans (84 to 4 percent), while a plurality of democrats were opposed (at 39 to 34), which was also true among african americans (37 to 28). these surveys are complemented by others that measure the fear that our public dialogue is too constricted. a harvard/harris survey in february asked, "do you think there is a growing cancel culture that is a threat to our freedom or not?" by 64-36, a majority of voters said they thought there was. republicans see a threat by 80-20; independents by 64-34, but democrats were split, with a slight majority, 52-48, saying they do not see a threat. this basic pattern is observable across a number of issues. although centrist democrats make up a majority of the party in the polls i cited above, the fact that a substantial minority of democrats takes the more extreme stance allows republicans to portray the democratic party as very much in thrall to its more "radical" wing. the past 12 months have seen a centrist countermobilization designed to strengthen a mainstream image of the democratic party and to block the power of the more radical left to set policy. new groups and digital publications include persuasion, counterweight, american purpose, foundation against intolerance and racism and the academic freedom alliance. nadine strossen, professor emerita at new york law school and former president of the american civil liberties union, wrote by email that she considers herself strossen cites "the proliferation of new organizations that seek to counter the illiberal trends in academia and beyond." there are of course plenty of people who sharply defend the progressive wing of the democratic coalition. elizabeth rose, a law student, argued, for example, in "in defense of cancel culture" last year that "for all the condemnations on cancel culture as an un-american speech suppressing monster, i would argue that cancel culture is incredibly american." cancel culture, she continued, in a new republic essay in 2019, "the strange liberal backlash to woke culture," ryu spaeth makes an interesting argument that aligns with rose's: in this contest, spaeth continues: or take this defense of the call to "defund the police" by rushi shah, a graduate student in computer science at princeton's center for information technology policy. shah wrote an op-ed in the jan. 21 daily princetonian: given this reality, shah continued, in some respects, this movement is the counter to right-wing populism in that the two share "an ideology of popular resentment against the order imposed on society by a long-established, differentiated ruling class which is believed to have a monopoly of power, property, breeding and culture," in the words of edward shils, a sociologist at the university of chicago who died in 1995. frances e. lee, a political scientist at princeton, argued in her 2019 article "populism and the american party system: opportunities and constraints," that populism from the left and right, lee continued, the conflict within the democratic party and among progressives gets played out on at least two levels. at one level, it is a dispute over ground rules. can a professor quote literature or historic documents that use taboo words? what rights should be granted to a person accused of sexual harassment? are there issues or subjects that should not be explored in an academic setting? on another level, though, it is a conflict over practical politics. do specific policies governing speech and sexual behavior win or lose voter support? are there policies that attract criticism from the opposition party that will stick? are certain policies so controversial that they divert attention from the opposition's liabilities? in an article in march, "why attacking 'cancel culture' and 'woke' people is becoming the g.o.p.'s new political strategy," perry bacon jr., formerly a senior writer at fivethirtyeight and now a washington post columnist, described the ways that policies the democratic left argued for provided political opportunities to the republican party: among the reasons republicans will continue to adopt an "anti-woke posture," bacon writes, is that it insofar as republicans suppress democratic votes, bacon continued, bacon's views are widely shared among democratic party strategists, whether or not they will say so publicly. and bacon is hardly alone. in a piece in new york magazine, "is 'anti-wokeness' the new ideology of the republican party?" ed kilgore makes the case that for republicans this approach is particularly attractive to conservative politicians and strategists, kilgore continued, because jonathan haidt, a social psychologist at n.y.u., argued in an email that the policies the democratic party's left wing is pushing are an anchor weighing down the party's prospects: in much gentler terms, barack obama has voiced analogous concerns. "this idea of purity and you're never compromised and you're always politically woke and all that stuff, you should get over that quickly," obama famously declared in october 2019: james carville, the top strategist for bill clinton's 1992 presidential campaign, was succinct in his assessment. he recently told sean illing, a writer at vox: "why not?" illing asked. "because they'll get clobbered." carville's answer provides insight into the question of whether, if the left wing of the democratic party is backing many policies that are unacceptable to a majority of voters and if some of those policies appear to violate constitutional protections of free speech and the rights of the accused, why hasn't there been more pushback in both politics and academia? i asked jonathan rauch, a senior fellow at brookings and the author of the new book "the constitution of knowledge: a defense of truth," about the lack of pushback, and he suggested a series of factors: randall kennedy, a law professor at harvard and the author of the forthcoming book "say it loud! on race, law, history and culture," cited in an email a similar set "of reasons for the deficient response to threats against freedom of thought, expression and learning emanating from the left." his list: at the same time, kennedy continued, many of the people demanding the diminution of what he sees as essential freedoms have learned how to package their insistence in effective ways. they have learned, kennedy wrote, to deploy skillfully the language of "hurt" -- as in "i don't care what the speaker's intentions were, what the speaker said has hurt my feelings and ought therefore to be prohibited." because of this, kennedy argued, for a political party on the front line of change, the centrists-versus-insurgents conflicts that currently plague the democratic party are inherent to a party that has chosen in general to take the liberal side on the racial and cultural issues that now play such a large role in politics. the questions of going too fast or too slow, of getting ahead of the voters, of responsibly engaging the obligations of leadership, are inescapable. diane halpern, professor emerita of psychology at claremont mckenna college, and no stranger to politicized controversy as a result of her work on differences in learning skills, wrote in an email: the difficulty, halpern continued, in theory, halpern is eminently reasonable. but the real question today is how amenable to reconciliation our politics actually are, given that there is profound conflict not only between the two parties but embedded within them.
