there is an ongoing debate over what kinds of investment in human capital -- roughly the knowledge, skills, habits, abilities, experience, intelligence, training, judgment, creativity and wisdom possessed by an individual -- contribute most to productivity and life satisfaction. is education no longer "a great equalizer of the conditions of men," as horace mann declared in 1848, but instead a great divider? can the biden administration's efforts to distribute cash benefits to the working class and the poor produce sustained improvements in the lives of those on the bottom tiers of income and wealth -- or would a substantial investment in children's training and enrichment programs at a very early age produce more consistent and permanent results? take the case of education. on this score -- if the assumption is "the more education, the better" -- then the united states looks pretty good. from 1976 to 2016 the white high school completion rate rose from 86.4 percent to 94.5 percent, the black completion rate from 73.5 percent to 92.2 percent, and the hispanic completion rate rose from 60.3 percent to 89.1 percent. the graduation rate of whites entering four-year colleges from 1996 to 2012 rose from 33.7 to 43.7 percent, for african americans it rose from 19.5 to 23.8 percent and for hispanics it rose from 22.8 to 34.1 percent. but these very gains appear to have also contributed to the widening disparity in income between those with different levels of academic attainment, in part because of the very different rates of income growth for men and women with high school degrees, college degrees and graduate or professional degrees. education lifts all boats, but not by equal amounts. david autor, an economist at m.i.t., together with the harvard economists claudia goldin and lawrence katz, tackled this issue in a paper last year, "extending the race between education and technology," asking: "how much of the overall rise in wage inequality since 1980 can be attributed to the large increase in educational wage differentials?" their answer: i asked autor to translate that data into language understandable to the layperson, and he wrote back: these differences result in large part because ever greater levels of skill -- critical thinking, problem-solving, originality, strategizing  -- are needed in a knowledge-based society. "the idea of a race between education and technology goes back to the nobel laureate jan tinbergen, who posited that technological change is continually raising skill requirements while education's job is to supply those rising skill levels," autor wrote in explaining the gains for those with higher levels of income. "if technology 'gets ahead' of education, the skill premium will tend to rise." but something more homely may also be relevant. several researchers argue that parenting style contributes to where a child ends up in life. as the skill premium and the economic cost of failing to ascend the education ladder rise in tandem, scholars find that adults are adopting differing parental styles -- a crucial form of investment in the human capital of their children -- and these differing styles appear to be further entrenching inequality. such key factors as the level of inequality, the degree to which higher education is rewarded and the strength of the welfare state are shaping parental strategies in raising children. in their paper "the economics of parenting," three economists, matthias doepke at northwestern, giuseppe sorrenti at university of zurich and fabrizio zilibotti at yale, describe three basic forms of child rearing: there is an "interaction between economic conditions and parenting styles," doepke and his colleagues write, resulting in the following patterns: the authors cite the scandinavian countries as key examples of this approach. authoritarian parenting, in turn, is most common in less-developed, traditional societies where there is little social mobility and children have the same jobs as their parents: finally, they continue, consider "a high-inequality society": this model, the authors write, fits the united states and china. there are some clear downsides to this approach: sorrenti elaborated in an email: what do these analyses suggest for policies designed to raise those on the lowest tiers of income and educational attainment? doepke, sorrenti and zilibotti agree that major investments in training, socialization and preparation for schooling of very young (4 and under) poor children along the lines of proposals by nobel laureate james heckman, an economist at the university of chicago, and roland fryer, a harvard economist, can prove effective. in an october 2020 paper, fryer and three colleagues described heckman, in turn, recently wrote on his website: doepke agreed: zilibotti, in turn, wrote in an email: the expansion of the heckman $13,500-per-child test pilot program to a universal national program received strong support in an economic analysis of its costs and benefits by diego daruich, an economist at the university of southern california. he argues in his 2019 paper "the macroeconomic consequences of early childhood development policies" that such an enormous government expenditure would produce substantial gains in social welfare, "an income inequality reduction of 7 percent and an increase in intergenerational mobility of 34 percent." as the debate over the effectiveness of education in reducing class and racial income differences continues, the moving to opportunity project stresses how children under the age of 13 benefit when they and their families move out of neighborhoods of high poverty concentration into more middle-class communities. in a widely discussed 2015 paper, "the effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on children," three harvard economists, raj chetty, nathaniel hendren and katz, wrote: there is a long and daunting history of enduring gaps in scholastic achievement correlated with socioeconomic status in the united states that should temper optimism. in a february 2020 paper -- "long-run trends in the u.s. ses-achievement gap" -- eric a. hanushek of the hoover institution at stanford, paul e. peterson of harvard's kennedy school, laura m. talpey of stanford's institute for economic policy research and ludger woessmann of the university of munich report that over nearly 50 years: the virtually unchanging ses-achievement gap, the authors continue, "is confirmed in analyses of the achievement gap by subsidized lunch eligibility and in separate estimations by ethnicity that consider changes in the ethnic composition." their conclusion: the pessimistic implications of this paper have not deterred those devoted to seeking ways to break embedded patterns of inequality and stagnant mobility. in a november 2019 essay, "we have the tools to reverse the rise in inequality," olivier blanchard of the peterson institute for international economics and dani rodrik, an economist at harvard, cited the ready availability of a host of policies with strong support among many economists, political scientists and democrats: adoption of policies calling for aggressive government intervention raises a crucial question, autor acknowledged in his email: "whether such interventions would kill the golden goose of u.s. innovation and entrepreneurship." autor's answer: a promising approach to the augmentation of human capital lies in the exploration of noncognitive skills -- perseverance, punctuality, self-restraint, politeness, thoroughness, postponement of gratification, grit -- all of which are increasingly valuable in a service-based economy. noncognitive skills have proved to be teachable, especially among very young children. shelly lundberg, an economics professor at the university of california-santa barbara, cites a range of projects and studies, including the perry preschool project, an intensive program for 3-to-4-year-old low-income children "that had long-term impacts on test scores, adult crime and male income." the potential gains from raising noncognitive skills are wide-ranging, she writes in a chapter of the december 2018 book "education, skills, and technical change: implications for future us gdp growth": but, she cautions, education, training in cognitive and noncognitive skills, nutrition, health care and parenting are all among the building blocks of human capital, and evidence suggests that continuing investments that combat economic hardship among whites and minorities -- and which help defuse debilitating conflicts over values, culture and race -- stand the best chance of reversing the disarray and inequality that plague our political system and our social order.
