there has been a remarkable erosion in public tolerance of "offensive expression about race, gender and religion," according to a paper dennis chong and morris levy, political scientists at the university of southern california, and jack citrin, a political scientist at berkeley, presented in september at the annual meeting of the american political science association. "tolerance has declined overall," they add, particularly "for a category of speech that is considered unworthy of first amendment protection because it violates the goal of equality." the three authors cite the 2018 promulgation of new guidelines by the american civil liberties union -- which was formerly unequivocal in its defense of free speech -- as a reflection of the changing views within a large segment of the liberal community. under the 2018 guidelines, the a.c.l.u. would now consider several factors that might warrant a refusal to take on certain cases: "our defense of speech may have a greater or lesser harmful impact on the equality and justice work to which we are also committed" depending on chong, citrin and levy write: traditionally, they point out, in an email, chong wrote that "the tolerance of white liberals has declined significantly since 1980, and tolerance levels are lowest among the youngest age cohorts." if, he continued, "we add education to the mix, we find that the most pronounced declines over time have occurred among white, college educated liberals, with the youngest age cohorts again having the lowest tolerance levels." the chong-citrin-levy paper focuses on the concept of harm in shaping public policy and in the growing determination of large swaths of progressives that a paramount goal of public discourse is to avoid inflicting injury, including verbal injury, on marginalized groups. in this context, harm can be understood as injury to physical and mental health occurring "when stress levels are perpetually elevated by living in a constant state of hyper-vigilance." proponents of what is known as moral foundations theory -- formulated in 2004 by jonathan haidt and craig joseph -- argue that across all cultures "several innate and universally available psychological systems are the foundations of 'intuitive ethics.'" the five foundations are care/harm, fairness/cheating, loyalty/betrayal, authority/subversion and sanctity/degradation. one of the central claims of this theory, as described in "mapping the moral domain" -- a 2011 paper by jesse graham, brian a. nosek, haidt, ravi iyer, spassena koleva and peter h. ditto -- is that i asked julie wronski, a political scientist at the university of mississippi, about the role of concerns over ideology and gender in the changing character of liberalism. "i think we need to move beyond a simple 'gender gap' story to better understand how conceptualizations of womanhood impact politics," she replied. "the first way is to think about the gender gap as a 'feminist gap.'" from this perspective, wronski continued, men can hold feminist values and women can be anti-feminist, noting that "the attitudes people have about gender roles in society have a bigger impact on political outcomes than simple male/female identification." wronski cited a paper, "partisan sorting and the feminist gap in american politics" by leonie huddy and johanna willmann, which argues that feminism "can be distinguished from political ideology when construed as support for women's political advancement, the equalization of male and female power, the removal of barriers that impede women's success, and a strengthening of women's autonomy." huddy and willmann noted that in a "2015 national survey, 60 percent of women and 33 percent of men considered themselves a feminist." there are substantial differences, however, in how feminist women and men align politically, according to their analysis: the authors created a feminism scale based on the respondent's identification with feminism, support for female politicians, perception of sex discrimination and gender resentment. based on survey data from the 2012 and 2016 elections, they found that personality characteristics play a key role, they found: "openness to experience consistently boosts feminism." a predilection for authoritarianism, in contrast, "consistently lowers support for feminism" while "agreeableness promotes feminism," although its effects are strongest "among white respondents." so too do demographic differences: "religiously observant men and women are less supportive of feminism than their nonobservant counterparts. well-educated respondents, especially well-educated women, are more supportive of feminism." single white women are "more supportive of feminism than women living with a partner." feminism, in addition, is strongly correlated with opposition to "traditional morality" -- defined by disagreement with such statements as "we should be more tolerant of people who live according to their own moral standards" and agreement with such assertions as "the newer lifestyles are contributing to a breakdown in our society." the correlation grew from minus .41 in 2012 to minus .53 in 2016. during this century, the power of feminism to signal partisanship has steadily increased for men and even more so for women, huddy and willmann found: in an email, huddy elaborated on the partisan significance of feminist commitments: in a 2018 paper, "effect of ideological identification on the endorsement of moral values depends on the target group," jan g. voelkel, a sociologist at stanford, and mark j. brandt, a professor of psychology at michigan state, argue that moral foundations theory that places liberals and conservatives in separate camps needs to be modified. voelkel and brandt maintain that "ideological differences in moral foundations" are not necessarily the result of differences in moral values per se, but can also be driven by "ingroup-versus-outgroup categorizations." the authors call this second process "political group conflict hypothesis." this hypothesis, voelkel and brandt contend, voelkel and brandt cite as an example the moral foundation of fairness: the surveys the authors conducted show that put another way: the debate over moral values and political conflict has engaged new contributors. richard hanania, president of the center for the study of partisanship and ideology and a former research fellow at columbia's saltzman institute of war and peace studies, argues that the role of gender in politics has been further complicated by a controversial and counterintuitive finding set forth in "the gender-equality paradox in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education" by gijsbert stoet and david c. geary, professors of psychology at essex university and the university of missouri. the authors propose that: assuming for the moment that this gender equality paradox is real, how does it affect politics and polarization in the united states? in an email, mohammad atari, a graduate student in psychology at the university of southern california and lead author of "sex differences in moral judgments across 67 countries," noted that "some would argue that in more gender-egalitarian societies men and women are more free to express their values regardless of external pressures to fit a predefined gender role," suggesting an easing of tensions. pivoting from gender to race, however, the nonpartisan democracy fund's voter study group this month issued "racing apart: partisan shifts on racial attitudes over the last decade." the study showed that the murder of george floyd produced a burst of racial empathy, robert griffin, mayesha quasem, john sides and michael tesler wrote, but they note that poll data suggests "this shift in attitudes was largely temporary. weekly surveys from the democracy fund + ucla nationscape project show that any aggregate changes had mostly evaporated by january 2021." additional evidence suggests that partisan hostility between democrats and republicans is steadily worsening. in their august 2021 paper, "cross-country trends in affective polarization," levi boxell and matthew gentzkow, both economists at stanford university, and jesse m. shapiro, a professor of political economy at brown, wrote: their conclusion is that over the past four decades, "the united states experienced the most rapid growth in affective polarization among the 12 o.e.c.d. countries we consider" -- the other 11 are france, sweden, germany, britain, norway, denmark, australia, japan, canada, new zealand and switzerland. in other words, whether we evaluate the current conflict-ridden political climate in terms of moral foundations theory, feminism or the political group conflict hypothesis, the trends are not favorable, especially if the outcome of the 2024 presidential election is close. if the continuing anger, resentment and denial among republicans in the aftermath of the 2020 presidential contest are precursors of the next election, current trends, in combination with the politicization of election administration by republican state legislatures, suggest that the loser in 2024, republican or democratic, will not take defeat lying down. the forces fracturing the political system are clearly stronger than the forces pushing for consensus.
