when it comes to the fate of big cities in the wake of the covid-19 pandemic, there are two sets of overlapping economic and political consequences, but they are not necessarily what you might expect. declining tax revenues, business closures, spiking rates of violent crime and an exodus to smaller communities have left major urban centers anxious about surviving the pandemic's aftermath and returning to a new normal. but all is not lost. in a paper published earlier this month, "america's post-pandemic geography, two urbanists who come from very different political perspectives, richard florida, a professor at the university of toronto, and joel kotkin, a professor at chapman university, argue: in addition, florida and kotkin write: in an email, florida argued that a key motivating force driving many of the recent departures from big cities was the desire to be away from the pandemic, as well as from pandemic restraints imposed by local governments: there is also political fallout from the nation's changing demography. jonathan rodden, a political scientist at stanford and the author of "why cities lose: the deep roots of the urban-rural political divide," explained in an email how the geographic dispersion of democratic voters may help slowly shift republican and competitive districts in a leftward direction: for decades, rodden continued, democratic suburban gains were already evident in the 2018 and 2020 elections in states like georgia, arizona, texas and north carolina. at the same time, the movement of democratic voters from urban centers is very likely to moderate the agenda-setting strength of progressive urban voters. this process will lessen an ideological problem that plagued democratic congressional candidates. in "why cities lose," rodden wrote: rodden continues: in his email, rodden argued that because republicans control congressional redistricting in many more states than democrats do, democrats may not make immediate gains in the house as a result of these population shifts. but, he noted, as these trends continue, districts gerrymandered at the beginning of the decade may shift in a more progressive direction over time: john austin, director of the michigan economic center, pointed out in an email that "even before the pandemic, there were a growing number of exceptions to the seemingly inexorable march of a tech and knowledge economy to consolidate in handfuls of superstar global cities." he cited as especially attractive those smaller cities with research universities, including iowa city, iowa; ann arbor, mich.; state college, pa.; and south bend, ind. "many techies realize they can flee the costs, congestion and craziness of the coasts (like the bay area)," austin said, austin believes that the movement of high-tech workers to smaller, redder states will benefit the democratic party. as these areas gain knowledge workers, austin wrote, they will see local politics once a rock-ribbed republican county, grand rapids' kent county voted for biden over trump 51.9 percent to 45 percent. in their march 2021 paper, "from l.a. to boise: how migration has changed during the covid-19 pandemic," peter haslag and daniel weagley, professors at vanderbilt and georgia tech, identified the highest percentage of movers from one state to another, topped by california residents going to texas, then new york to florida and illinois to florida. the geographic trends are striking. of the top 20, 19 were from blue states to red states. last year, manhattan's population fell by 20,337, the largest drop in 30 years, according to data compiled by william frey, a brookings senior fellow. over the three decades from 1990 to 2020, frey found that in large metropolitan counties, the population of inner and outer suburbs grew twice as much, at 38.7 million, as that of center cities, at 18.8 million, as shown in the accompanying graphic. four scholars from n.y.u. and columbia -- arpit gupta, vrinda mittal, jonas peeters and stijn van nieuwerburgh -- studied real estate sales and rental trends in their april 2021 paper, "flattening the curve: pandemic-induced revaluation of urban real estate," to determine population shifts before and during the pandemic. they found a covid-driven reversal in the trend toward ever "more concentrated economic activity in a handful of dense urban areas" with the shifts "related to practices around working from home, suggesting that they may persist to the extent that employers allow remote working practices beyond the pandemic." while the ability to work remotely gives workers access to "the larger and more elastic housing stock at the periphery of cities, thereby alleviating rent burden," gupta and his co-authors write, in an email, van nieuwerburgh elaborated. "there are serious headwinds for our 'gateway' cities like n.y.c., s.f., d.c., boston," he wrote, noting that he could "imagine how work from home may lead to a 20 percent reduction in demand for downtown office space." this, in turn, "is a big story because banks have lent billions against office buildings, and for small and medium-sized banks (and maybe even for some big ones) this exposure is material." who will the winners and losers be? van nieuwerburgh's answer: i asked gupta a series of follow-up questions and he replied by email that "cities with a lot of working from home, and with high prices -- seattle, s.f., n.y.c. -- are going to be the most affected" and there will be "increasing migration of people from blue states to red and purple ones, which would make states like georgia even more competitive." he added: "suburban areas in the vicinity of large cities, and already fast-growing sunbelt and mountain west cities, seem like the biggest winners. urban cores and the midwest seem like some of the losers." nicholas bloom, an economist at stanford, has a decidedly pessimistic outlook. he told the city journal in an april 2020 interview, "i fear that the prominence of the city, and particularly city centers, will decline." in recent decades, he continued, in an april 2021 paper, "why working from home will stick," bloom and two colleagues, jose maria barrero, a professor at instituto tecnologico autonomo de mexico, and steven j. davis, a professor at the university of chicago, argue that the covid pandemic has revolutionized work, with remote employees quadrupling from roughly 5 percent to roughly 20 percent of the work force. the consequences will be felt everywhere, especially in big cities, they write: "the shift to wfh will also have highly uneven geographic effects, diminishing the fortunes of cities like san francisco with high rates of inward commuting." the shift to working from home "will lower expenditures on meals, entertainment, personal services, and shopping in major cities by 5 to 10 percent of prepandemic overall spending." in a detailed set of analyses for new york city and san francisco, with san francisco data appearing in parentheses, bloom and his colleagues report from a series of monthly surveys they conducted that the result is a 13 percent drop in consumer spending in new york and 4.6 percent drop in san francisco. the net benefits of the shift will, in turn, "flow mainly to the highly educated and well paid," according to the four authors, and "will yield larger benefits (as a percent of earnings) for men, the college-educated, those with children and persons with greater earnings." the earnings relationship, they note, "is very steep." patrick sharkey, a professor of sociology at princeton, pointed to an additional threat to urban life: the surge in violent crime: there is, sharkey continued, if violence keeps rising (in new york, for example, shootings rose 95 percent over 2020) and if government fails to intervene, sharkey warned, "those who have the resources to leave central cities will do so." what can we anticipate? the lack of consensus on this question is reflected in individual essays that florida and kotkin wrote. florida, ever the optimist, wrote in june 2020: kotkin, ever the pessimist, wrote in march 2021: take your pick.
