why is donald trump's big lie so hard to discredit? this has been a live question for more than a year, but inside it lies another: do republican officials and voters actually believe trump's claim that joe biden stole the 2020 election by corrupting ballots -- the same ballots that put so many republicans in office -- and if they do believe it, what are their motives? a december 2021 university of massachusetts-amherst survey found striking links between attitudes on race and immigration and disbelief in the integrity of the 2020 election. according to the poll, two-thirds of republicans, 66 percent, agreed that "the growth of the number of immigrants to the u.s. means that america is in danger of losing its culture and identity," and the same percentage of republicans are convinced that "the democratic party is trying to replace the current electorate with voters from poorer countries around the world." following up on the umass survey, four political scientists -- jesse rhodes, raymond la raja, tatishe nteta and alexander theodoridis -- wrote in an essay posted on the washington post's monkey cage: according to experts i asked, republican elected officials who either affirm donald trump's claim that the 2020 election was corrupt or refuse to call trump out base their stance on a sequence of rationales. mike mccurry, president bill clinton's press secretary, sees the origin of one rationale in demographic trends: mccurry went on: some maintain that another rationale underpinning submission to the lie is that it signals loyalty to the larger conservative cause. musa al-gharbi, a sociologist at columbia, pointed out in an email that acceptance of trump's false claims gives republican politicians a way of bridging the gap between a powerful network of donors and elites who back free trade capitalism and the crucial bloc of white working-class voters seeking trade protectionism and continued government funding of social security and medicare: for those republican leaders, al-gharbi continued, "who are the swamp, or could be reasonably construed as such, it is important to create an apparent distance from the establishment. flirting with the big lie is a good way of doing so." sarah binder, a political scientist at george washington university and a senior fellow at the brookings institution, noted in an email that "fear of electoral retribution from trump -- and from republican voters -- drives senate g.o.p. reluctance to break with trump." the former president, she continued, the underlying policy agreements between republican incumbents and trump reinforces these straightforward concerns over re-election, in binder's view: along similar lines, bruce cain, a political scientist at stanford, observes that republican elected officials make their calculations based on the goal of political survival: this approach, cain continued, "is the path of least political resistance. trump in 2016 demonstrated that he could win the presidency" while rejecting calls to reach out to minorities, by targeting a constituency that is "predominantly white and 80 percent conservative." because of its homogeneity, cain continued, "the republican party is much more unified than the democrats at the moment." while there was considerable agreement among the scholars and strategists whom i contacted that republican politicians consciously develop strategies to deal with what many privately recognize is a lie, there is less agreement on the thinking of republican voters. lane cuthbert, along with his umass colleague alex theodoridis, asked in an op-ed in the washington post: in their own analysis of poll data, cuthbert and theodoridis concluded that most republicans are true believers in trump's lie: al-gharbi sharply disputes this conclusion: poll respondents, he continued, one way to test how much people actually believe something, al-gharbi wrote, "is to look out for yawning gaps between rhetoric and behaviors." the fact that roughly 2,500 people participated in the jan. 6 insurrection suggests that the overwhelming majority of republicans do not believe the election was stolen, no matter what they tell pollsters, in al-gharbi's view. he continued: whatever the motivation, isabel v. sawhill, a brookings senior fellow, warned that republican leaders and voters could be caught in a vicious cycle: jake grumbach, a political scientist at the university of washington, noted in an email that the big lie fits into a larger republican strategy: "in an economically unequal society, it is important for the conservative economic party to use culture war politics to win elections because they are unlikely to win based on their economic agenda." "there are a number of reasons why some republican elites who were once anti-trump became loyal to trump," grumbach said. he continued: frances lee, a political scientist at princeton, took a different tack, arguing that republican members of congress, especially those in the senate, would like nothing better than to have the big lie excised from the contemporary political landscape: instead, lee argued, "many republican voters still support and love donald trump, and republican elected officials want to be able to continue to represent these voters in washington." the bottom line, she continued, is that paul begala, a democratic strategist, argues that trumpism, begala wrote in an email, "is more of a cult of personality, which makes fealty to the dear leader even more important. how else do you explain 16 g.o.p. senators who voted to reauthorize the voting rights act in 2006 all refusing to even allow it to be debated in 2022?" begala compares senator mitch mcconnell's views of the voting rights act in 2006 -- "america's history is a story of ever-increasing freedom, hope and opportunity for all. the voting rights act of 1965 represents one of this country's greatest steps forward in that story. today i am pleased the senate reaffirmed that our country must continue its progress towards becoming a society in which every person, of every background, can realize the american dream" -- to mcconnell's stance now: "this is not a federal issue; it ought to be left to the states." republican politicians, in begala's assessment, it is at this point, begala continued, "where leadership matters. trump stokes bigotry, he sows division, he promotes racism, and when other g.o.p. politicians fail to disavow trump's divisiveness, they abet it. what a contrast to other republican leaders in my lifetime." like begala, charles stewart iii, a political scientist at m.i.t., was blunt in his analysis: these voters, according to stewart, philip bobbitt, a professor of law at columbia and the university of texas, argued in an email that republican acceptance of trump's falsehoods is a reflection of the power trump has over members of the party: thomas mann, a brookings senior fellow, made the case in an email that trump has transformed the republican party so that membership now precludes having "a moral sense: honesty, empathy, respect for one's colleagues, wisdom, institutional loyalty, a willingness to put country ahead of party on existential matters, an openness to changing conditions." instead, mann wrote: bart bonikowski, a sociologist at n.y.u., describes the danger of this political dynamic: the unwillingness of republican leaders to challenge trump's relentless lies, for whatever reason -- for political survival, for mobilization of whites opposed to minorities, to curry favor, to feign populist sympathies -- is as consequential as or more so than actually believing the lie. if republican officials and their voters are willing to swallow an enormous and highly consequential untruth for political gain, they have taken a first step toward becoming willing allies in the corrupt manipulation of future elections. in that sense, the big lie is a precursor to more dangerous threats -- threats that are plausible in ways that less than a decade ago seemed inconceivable. the capitulation to and appeasement of trump by republican leaders is actually setting up even worse possibilities than what we've lived through so far.
