in 2016, donald trump recruited voters with the highest levels of animosity toward african americans, assembling a "schadenfreude" electorate -- voters who take pleasure in making the opposition suffer -- that continues to dominate the republican party, even in the aftermath of the trump presidency. with all his histrionics and theatrics, trump brought the dark side of american politics to the fore: the alienated, the distrustful, voters willing to sacrifice democracy for a return to white hegemony. the segregationist segment of the electorate has been a permanent fixture of american politics, shifting between the two major parties. for more than two decades, scholars and analysts have written about the growing partisan antipathy and polarization that have turned america into two warring camps, politically speaking. lilliana mason, a political scientist at johns hopkins, makes the case via twitter that trump has "served as a lightning rod for lots of regular people who hold white christian supremacist beliefs." the solidification of their control over the republican party "makes it seem like a partisan issue. but this faction has been around longer than our current partisan divide." in fact, "they are not loyal to a party -- they are loyal to white christian domination." trump's success in transforming the party has radically changed the path to the republican presidential nomination: the traditional elitist route through state and national party leaders, the washington lobbying and interest group community and top fund-raisers across the country no longer ensures success, and may, instead, prove a liability. for those seeking to emulate trump -- ted cruz, josh hawley, ron desantis, for example -- the basic question is whether trump's trajectory is replicable or whether there are unexplored avenues to victory at the 2024 republican national convention. when trump got into the 2016 primary race, "he did not have a clear coalition, nor did he have the things candidates normally have when running for president: political experience, governing experience, or a track record supporting party issues and ideologies," joseph uscinski, a political scientist at the university of miami, wrote in an email. lacking these traditional credentials, trump sought out "the underserved market within the republican electorate by giving those voters what they might have wanted, but weren't getting from the other mainstream selections." the objectives of the trump wing of the republican party stand out in other respects, especially in the strength of its hostility to key democratic minority constituencies. julie wronski, a political scientist at the university of mississippi -- a co-author, with mason and john kane of n.y.u., of a just published paper, "activating animus: the uniquely social roots of trump support" -- put it this way in reply to my emailed query: for as long as trump remains the standard-bearer of the republican party, wronski continued, "this animosity coalition will define the party." animosity toward these four democratic-aligned minority groups is not limited to republican voters. mason, wronski and kane created an "animus to democrat groups" scale, ranked from zero at the least hostile to 1.0 at the most. kane wrote me that the accompanying graphic demonstrates kane's point. the three authors go on: before trump took center stage in 2015, republican leaders were determined to "stymie democratic policy initiatives, resist compromise, and make it clear that republicans desire to score political victories and win back power from democrats," kane wrote in his email, but "establishment republicans generally did not openly demonize, much less dehumanize, democratic politicians at the national level." trump, kane continued, most significantly, in mason's view, is that bipartisanship, mason continued in a lengthy twitter thread, "is not the answer to the problem. we need to confront this particular faction of americans who have been uniquely visible and anti-democratic since before the civil war (when they were democrats)." in their paper, mason, wronski and kane conclude: adam enders, a political scientist at the university of louisville, and uscinski, in their june 2021 paper "on modeling the social-psychological foundations of support for donald trump" describe a "trump voter profile": "an amalgamation of attitudes about, for example, racial groups, immigrants and political correctness -- that rivals partisanship and ideology as predictors of trump support and is negatively related to support for mainstream republican candidates." in an email, enders described this profile as fitting those attracted to trump's uscinski and enders are the lead authors of a forthcoming paper, "american politics in two dimensions: partisan and ideological identities versus anti-establishment orientations," in which they argue that in the case of trump and other anti-democratic leaders around the world, uscinski and enders contend that anti-establishment voters, uscinski and enders write, "are more likely to believe that the 'one percent' controls the economy for their own good, believe that a 'deep state' is embedded within the government and believe that the mainstream media is 'deliberately' misleading us." such voters "are more prevalent among younger people, those with lower incomes, those with less formal education, and among racial and ethnic minority groups. in other words, it is groups who have historically occupied a tenuous position in the american socio-economic structure." the most intensely partisan voters -- very strong democrats and very strong republicans -- are the least anti-establishment, according to uscinski and enders: that, in turn, leads uscinski and enders to another contrarian conclusion: one politician whose appeal was similar to trump's, as many have noted, was george wallace, the segregationist governor of alabama, who ran for president four times in the 1960s and 1970s, openly using anti-black rhetoric. omar wasow, a political scientist at pomona college, cites wallace in an email: republican candidates before trump used so-called dog-whistle themes designed to capitalize on white racial fears, wasow pointed out, in such a way that they in their july 3 paper, "partisan schadenfreude and the demand for candidate cruelty," steven w. webster, adam n. glynn and matthew p. motta, political scientists at indiana university, emory and oklahoma state, explore "the prevalence of partisan schadenfreude -- that is, taking 'joy in the suffering' of partisan others." in it, they argue that a "sizable portion of the american mass public engages in partisan schadenfreude and these attitudes are most commonly expressed by the most ideologically extreme americans." in addition, webster, glynn and motta write, these voters create a "demand for candidate cruelty" since these voters are "more likely than not to vote for candidates who promise to pass policies that 'disproportionately harm' supporters of the opposing political party." in response to my emailed inquiries, webster answered: the kind of pain voters would like to see inflicted on their adversaries varies by ideology, partisanship and issue. webster argues that "among those who accept the scientific consensus that climate change is occurring and is not attributable to natural causes, over one-third agreed that climate change deniers 'get what they deserve when disasters like hurricanes make landfall where they live.'" democrats and republicans express two very different forms of schadenfreude over the covid-19 pandemic, and trump often capitalized on this. trump's supporters, webster wrote, webster went on: along parallel lines, christopher sebastian parker, a political scientist at the university of washington, wrote me: trump appealed to voters, parker continued, who "wanted 'their' country back, so they mobilized in an effort to make that happen." these kinds of appeals can work in both directions. "in some of my own research," parker wrote, from one vantage point, there is a legitimate argument that trump has not really changed the republican party. in an article in vox in august of 2020, "trump was supposed to change the g.o.p. but the g.o.p. changed him," jane coaston, now the host of the times's podcast "the argument," wrote: more recently, my times colleague alexander burns wrote on july 4 about "the frustrating reality of political competition these days: the president -- any president -- might be able to chip away at voters' skepticism of his party or their cynicism about washington, but he cannot engineer a broad realignment in the public mood." the electorate, burns noted, all true. but at the same time trump has mobilized and consolidated a cohort that now exercises control over the republican party, a renegade segment of the electorate, perhaps as large as one-third of all voters, which disdains democratic principles, welcomes authoritarian techniques to crush racial and cultural liberalism, seeks to wrest away the election machinery and suffers from the mass delusion that trump won last november. regardless of whether trump runs again, he has left an enormous footprint -- a black mark -- on american politics, which will stain elections for years to come.
