determined to enforce white political dominance in pivotal states like georgia, arizona, texas and north carolina, republicans are enacting or trying to enact laws restricting the right to vote, empowering legislatures to reject election outcomes and adopting election rules and procedures designed to block the emergence of multiracial political majorities. republicans "see the wave of demography coming and they are just trying to hold up a wall and keep it from smashing them in," william frey, a senior fellow at brookings, told cnn's ron brownstein. "it's the last bastion of their dominance, and they are doing everything they can." the actions of republican state legislators to curtail absentee voting, limit days for early voting and seize control of local election boards have prompted 188 scholars to sign a "statement of concern: the threats to american democracy and the need for national voting and election administration standards," in which they assert: among statutes republican-controlled state legislatures have passed or are in the process of approving are "laws politicizing the administration and certification of elections" that the precipitating event driving the current surge of regressive voting legislation in republican-controlled states is donald trump's defeat in 2020 and the widespread acceptance on the right of trump's subsequent claim that the presidency was stolen from him. the belief among republicans that trump is essential to their drive to slow or halt the growing power of nonwhite voters aligned with the democratic party has powered the broad acquiescence to that lie both by people who know better and by people who don't. virginia gray, a political scientist at the university of north carolina, argued in an email that for republicans, "the strongest factors are racial animosity, fear of becoming a white minority and the growth of white identity." she noted that tucker carlson of fox news articulated republican anxiety during his show on april 8: trump, carlson and their allies in the republican party, gray continued, aziz huq and tom ginsburg, law professors at the university of chicago, make the case in their 2018 paper, "how to lose a constitutional democracy," that in the united states and other advanced democracies, the erosion of democracy will be gradual and stealthy, not an abrupt shift to authoritarianism. "is the united states at risk of democratic backsliding? and would the constitution prevent such decay?" huq and ginsburg ask, and write: in an email, ginsburg wrote that there are two forces that lead to the erosion of democracy: "charismatic populism and partisan degradation, in which a party just gives up on the idea of majority rule and seeks to end democratic competition. obviously the u.s. has faced both forces at the same time in trumpism." from a different vantage point, sheri berman, a political scientist at barnard, argues that there is a crucial distinction to be drawn in examining the consequences of republican tampering with election administration, with one more dangerous than the other. in an email, berman writes: in other circumstances, berman argues, one could imagine "having a good faith debate about the conditions under which mail-in ballots are distributed and counted, whether id should be required to vote and if so of what type, etc." but in the current contest, she says, "these concerns are not motivated by a general desire to improve the quality of our elections, but rather by false, partisan accusations about the illegitimacy of biden's victory and so good faith discussions of reform are impossible." the republican initiatives to inject partisanship into the oversight process, in her view, among those i consulted for this column, there was wide agreement that democratic backsliding is a process difficult for the average voter to detect -- and that one of the crucial factors enabling the current procedural undermining of democracy in the states is that voters have little interest in or understanding of election rules and regulations. "democratic erosion is subtle and slow, often nearly imperceptible until it's too late," robert blair, a political scientist at brown, wrote in an email: blair is decidedly pessimistic about the likelihood that american voters will succeed in opposing the degradation of the system: daniel hopkins, a political scientist at the university of pennsylvania, stressed this point in an email: the low visibility and lack of public understanding of arcane shifts in election law -- for example, the shift of responsibility for determining winners and losers from election officials to state legislatures -- greatly empowers partisan elites. lee drutman, a senior fellow at the new america think tank and one of the organizers of new america's "statement of concern," wrote by email: like many of the co-signers of the "statement of concern," drutman has no expectation that the supreme court would step in to block states from tilting the partisan balance by tinkering with election rules and procedures: laura gamboa, a political scientist at the university of utah, is less harsh in her assessment of the citizenry, but she too does not place much hope in the ability of the american electorate to protect democratic institutions from assault: more important, gamboa argued that the corrosion of political norms that protect democratic governance the fact that public attention has been focused on trump's claim that the election was stolen, the jan. 6 assault on the capitol and republican stonewalling against the creation of a commission to investigate the attack on congress help mask the fact that the crucial action is taking place across the country in state capitols, with only intermittent national coverage, especially on network television. these republican-controlled state governments have become, in the words of jacob grumbach, a political scientist at the university of washington, "laboratories of democratic backsliding," the title of his april paper. grumbach developed 61 indicators of the level of adherence to democratic procedures and practices -- what he calls a "state democracy index" -- and tracked those measures in the states over the period from 2000 to 2018. the indicators include registration and absentee voting requirements, restrictions on voter registration drives and gerrymandering practices. grumbach's conclusion: "republican control of state government, however, consistently and profoundly reduces state democratic performance during this time period." the results, he writes, in terms of specific states and regions, grumbach found that "states on the west coast and in the northeast score higher on the democracy measures than states in the south," which lost ground over the 18 years of the study. at the same time, "states like north carolina and wisconsin were among the most democratic states in the year 2000, but by 2018 they are close to the bottom. illinois and vermont move from the middle of the pack in 2000 to among the top democratic performers in 2018." grumbach contends that there are two sets of motivating factors that drive key elements of the republican coalition to support anti-democratic policies: at one level, the republican anti-democratic drive is clearly a holding action. a detailed brookings study, "america's electoral future: the coming generational transformation," by rob griffin, ruy teixeira and william frey, argues that republicans have reason to fear the future: in addition, the three authors write, "america's youngest generations are more racially and ethnically diverse than older generations." as a result, griffin, teixeira and frey contend, from 2020 to 2036, the authors project that the percentage of eligible voters who identify as nonwhite in texas will grow from 50 to 60 percent, in georgia from 43 to 50 percent, in arizona from 38 to 48 percent. as these percentages grow, republicans will be under constant pressure to enact state legislation to further restrict registration and voting. the question will become: how far are they willing to go? i posed that question to terry moe, a political scientist at stanford. his reply:
