a highly charged ideological transition reflecting a "massive four-decade-long shift in political values and attitudes among more educated people -- a shift from concern with traditional materialist issues like redistribution to a concern for public goods like the environment and diversity" is a driving force in the battle between left and right, according to richard florida, an urbanologist at the university of toronto. this ideological transition has been accompanied by the concentration of liberal elites in urban centers, florida continued in an email, recent decades have witnessed what dennis chong, a political scientist at the university of southern california, describes in an email as "a demographic realignment of political tolerance in the u.s. that first became evident in the late 1980s-early 1990s." before that, chong pointed out, "the college educated, and younger generations, were among the most tolerant groups in the society of all forms of social and political nonconformity." since the 1990s, "these groups have become significantly less tolerant of hate speech pertaining to race, gender and social identities." chong argued that "the expansion of equal rights for racial and ethnic minorities, women, l.g.b.t.q. and other groups that have suffered discrimination has caused a re-evaluation of the harms of slurs and other derogatory expressions in professional and social life." the result? "in a striking reversal," chong wrote, "liberals are now consistently less tolerant than conservatives of a wide range of controversial speech about racial, gender and religious identities." pippa norris, a lecturer in comparative politics at harvard's kennedy school -- together with ronald inglehart, a political scientist at the university of michigan who died in may -- has explored this extraordinary shift from materialist to postmaterialist values in advanced countries, the movement from a focus on survival to a focus on self-expression, which reflects profound changes in a society's existential conditions, including in the united states. in an aug. 21 paper, "cancel culture: myth or reality?," norris writes, "in postindustrial societies characterized by predominately liberal social cultures, like the u.s., sweden and u.k., right-wing scholars were most likely to perceive that they faced an increasingly chilly climate." using data from a global survey, world of political science, 2019, norris created a "cancel culture index" based on political scientists' responses to three questions asking whether "aspects of academic life had got better, no change or got worse, using the 5-point scale: 1. respect for open debate from diverse perspectives, 2. pressures to be 'politically correct' and 3. academic freedom to teach and research." using this measure, norris found that "american scholars on the moderate right and far right report experiencing worsening pressures to be politically correct, limits on academic freedom and a lack of respect for open debate," compared with the views of moderate and more left-wing scholars: inglehart, in his 2018 book, "the rise of postmaterialist values in the west and the world," described how increasing affluence and economic security, especially for educated elites, have been eric kaufmann, a political scientist at the university of london and the author of "whiteshift: populism, immigration and the future of white majorities," argued in a series of emails that the views of white liberals are shaped by their distinctive set of priorities. in contrast to white conservatives, kaufmann wrote, "white liberals have low attachment to traditional collective identities (race, nation, religion) but as high attachment to moral values and political beliefs as conservatives. this makes the latter most salient for them." according to kaufmann, white liberals "have invested heavily in universalist ethical values." in kaufmann's view, a new, assertive ideology has emerged on the left, and the strength of this wing is reflected in its ability to influence the decision making of university administrators: on sept. 4, the economist published a cover story, "the illiberal left: how did american 'wokeness' jump from elite schools to everyday life?," that argues that there is: from another angle, cass r. sunstein, a law professor at harvard and a former obama administration official, asks in "the power of the normal," a 2018 paper: sunstein is especially concerned with how new norms expand in scope: sunstein is careful to note, "it is important to say that on strictly normative grounds, the less horrific cases might also be horrific." a key player in this process is what sunstein calls "the opprobrium entrepreneur." the motivations of opprobrium entrepreneurs: sunstein cites "microaggressions" as an area that "has exploded," writing: opprobrium entrepreneurs can be found on both sides of the aisle. jeffrey adam sachs, a political scientist at acadia university, has written about a flood tide of republican-sponsored bills in state legislatures designed to prohibit teaching of "everything from feminism and racial equity to calls for decolonization." in an article in february, "the new war on woke," sachs wrote: sachs's bottom line: "once you let government get into the censorship business, no speech is safe." zachary goldberg, a graduate student at georgia state, has researched "the moral, emotional and technological underpinnings of the 'great awokening' -- the rapid and recent liberalization of racial and immigration attitudes among white liberals and democrats" for his doctoral thesis. goldberg has produced data from the 2020 american national election studies survey showing that white liberals, in contrast to white moderates and conservatives, rate minorities higher on what political scientists call a thermometer scale than they do whites. one of the less recognized factors underlying efforts by conservatives and liberals to enforce partisan orthodoxy lies in the pressure to maintain party loyalty at a time when the democrats and republicans are struggling to manage coalitions composed of voters with an ever-expanding number of diverse commitments -- economic, cultural, racial -- that often do not cohere. jonathan rodden, a stanford political scientist, elaborated in an email: i asked william galston, a senior fellow at brookings who has written extensively about democratic party conflicts, what role he sees white liberal elites playing in the enforcement of progressive orthodoxies. he wrote back: for some white liberals, galston continued: instead of guilt, galston argued, "this behavior is just as likely to reflect leadership that lacks purpose and core convictions and that seeks mainly to keep the ship afloat, wherever it may be headed." "amidst this sea of analytical uncertainties, i am increasingly confident of one thing: a backlash is building," galston wrote. jonathan haidt, a professor at n.y.u.'s stern school of business, contends that a small constituency on the far left is playing an outsize role: haidt contends that "the animating emotion" for acquiescence to the demands of this type of progressive activist by those with less extreme views: how do things look now? "the first amendment on campus 2020 report: college students' views of free expression," a study produced by the knight foundation based on a survey of 3,000 students, found strong support for free speech. the report noted that "68 percent regard citizens' free speech rights as being 'extremely important' to democracy" and "that 81 percent support a campus environment where students are exposed to all types of speech, even if they may find it offensive." at the same time, however, "most college students believe efforts at diversity and inclusion 'frequently' (27 percent) or 'occasionally' (49 percent) come into conflict with free speech rights," and "63 percent of students agree that the climate on their campus deters students from expressing themselves openly, up from 54 percent in 2016." similarly, according to the knight survey, trends on social media from 2016 to 2020 were all negative: it's not too much to say that the social and cultural changes of the past four decades have been cataclysmic. the signs of it are everywhere. donald trump rode the coattails of these issues into office. could he -- or someone else who has been watching closely -- do it again?
