the issue cutting across every aspect of american politics today is whether -- and how -- the nation can survive as a multiracial democracy. one key question is what the political impact has been of the decades-long quest to integrate america's schools. a study published last year, "the long-run effects of school racial diversity on political identity," examined how "the end of race-based busing in charlotte-mecklenburg schools, an event that led to large changes in school racial composition," affected the partisanship of students as adults. the authors, stephen billings, of the university of colorado, eric chyn, of dartmouth, and kareem haggag, of u.c.l.a.'s anderson school of management, found that "a 10-percentage point increase in the share of minorities in a student's assigned school decreased their likelihood of registering as a republican by 8.8 percent." the drop was "entirely driven by white students (a 12 percent decrease)." "what mechanisms can explain our results?" the authors asked. their answer: in support of their argument, the authors cite two additional papers, "the impact of college diversity on behavior toward minorities," by scott e. carrell, mark hoekstra and james e. west, economists at the university of california-davis, texas a&m and baylor, which found "that white students who are randomly assigned a black roommate in their freshman year are more likely to choose a black roommate in subsequent years," and "building social cohesion between christians and muslims through soccer in post-isis iraq" by salma mousa, a political scientist at yale, which found "evidence of positive impacts of religious-based and caste-based intergroup contact through sports." in major respects, the busing of public school students in charlotte-mecklenburg in north carolina meets the requirements for productive interracial contact posited by gordon allport, a professor of psychology at harvard, in his classic 1954 book "the nature of prejudice." allport wrote that prejudice the charlotte-mecklenburg integration program had widespread public support. education week reported that after the federal courts in 1971 ordered busing to achieve integration: in that respect, charlotte-mecklenburg stood out in a nation where cities like boston and detroit experienced divisive and often violent protest. a 2018 study, "past place, present prejudice," explored some of the complexities of court-ordered racial integration. the authors, seth goldman, a professor of communications at the university of massachusetts, and daniel hopkins, a political scientist at the university of pennsylvania, report that "if a non-hispanic white person grew up in a county with no african americans, we should expect that person's prejudice to be 2.3 points lower than an otherwise similar respondent growing up in a county that is 18 percent black." goldman and hopkins described their data as supporting the following conclusion: "proximity during one's formative years increases racial prejudice years later." chyn, an author of the "school racial diversity" paper, and goldman, an author of the "past place" paper, both stressed by email that they were comparing racial and political attitudes under different circumstances. goldman wrote: chyn said: brian t. hamel, a political scientist at louisiana state university, and bryan wilcox-archuleta, a research scientist at facebook, studied intergroup contact in a context more likely to intensify racial conflict. they reported in their paper "black workers in white places: daytime racial diversity and white public opinion" that "voting behavior in presidential and congressional elections, feelings of racial resentment and attitudes on affirmative action" of whites are more conservative in neighborhoods where the share of black nonresident workers is significantly higher than in places with fewer black nonresident workers. "whites respond to just the passing, irregular presence of blacks who commute into their neighborhood for work," hamel elaborated in an email. "the upshot is that blacks do not have to even live in the same neighborhood as whites to get the kind of racial threat reactions that we see in other work." david o. sears, a political scientist at u.c.l.a., contends in his 2014 paper "the american color line and black exceptionalism" that: sears adds that: the history and experience of black americans, compared with other minorities', are unique, according to sears: sears cites data in support of his argument that african americans have faced different historical contingencies in the story of american integration: "in the 2010 census, the segregation of blacks from whites remained extremely high, with a dissimilarity index of 59," while the dissimilarity index (a measure of racial or ethnic segregation or isolation) was 48 for latinos and 41 for asian americans. sears continued: in this regard, economic factors have been instrumental. in "the color of disparity: racialized income inequality and support for liberal economic policies," benjamin j. newman and bea-sim ooi, political scientists at the university of california-riverside, and tyler thomas reny, of claremont graduate university, compared support for liberal economic policies in zip codes where very few of the poor were black with zip codes where a high proportion of the poor were black. "exposure to local economic inequality is only systematically associated with increased support for liberal economic policies when the respective 'have-nots' are not black," according to newman, ooi and reny. a 2021 study, "the activation of prejudice and presidential voting" by daniel hopkins -- a co-author of "past place, present prejudice" -- raises a related question: hopkins examined whites' responses to donald trump's 2016 campaign, which contained more overt anti-immigrant rhetoric than anti-black themes. the result nonetheless: "donald trump's candidacy activated anti-black but not anti-latino prejudice," hopkins writes. hopkins acknowledges that "people who expressed more restrictionist immigration attitudes in 2008 and 2012 were more likely to shift toward trump," but argues that it did not translate into increased bias against hispanics because it reflected an even deeper-seated racism: hopkins speculates that trump successfully activated anti-black views because "generations of racialized political issues dividing blacks and whites have produced developed psychological schema in many whites' minds, schema that are evoked even by rhetoric targeting other groups." the long history of black-white conflict has, hopkins argues: against this generally troubling background, there are some noteworthy countervailing trends. in an august 2021 paper, "race and income in u.s. suburbs: are diverse suburbs disadvantaged?," ankit rastogi, a postdoctoral fellow at the university of pennsylvania's center for the study of ethnicity, race and immigration, challenges "two assumptions: that people of color are concentrated largely in cities and that communities of color are disadvantaged." rastogi -- using data from the 2019 american community survey -- finds instead that: by 2010, rastogi points out, majorities of every major demographic group lived in suburbs: in addition, rastogi writes: while rastogi correctly points to some optimistic trends, david sears presents a less positive view: the key, sears continues: sears does not, however, get the last word. in a march 2021 report, "the growing diversity of black america," the pew research center found some striking changes in recent decades: from 2000 to 2019, the percentage of african americans with at least a bachelor's degree rose from 15 to 23 percent, as the share with a master's degree or higher nearly doubled from 5 to 9 percent. at the same time, the share of african americans without a high school degree was cut by more than half over the same period, from 28 to 13 percent. median black household income has grown only modestly in inflation-adjusted dollars, from $43,581 in 2000 to $44,000 in 2019, but there were improvements in the distribution of income, with the share earning more than $50,000 growing. in 2000, 31 percent of black households made $25,000 or less (in 2019 u.s. dollar adjusted value), 25 percent made $25,000 to $49,999, 28 percent made $50,000 to less than $99,999, and 16 percent made $100,000 or more. in 2019, 29 percent of black households made less than $25,000, a quarter earned $25,000 to $49,999, 17 percent made $50,000 to $74,999, 10 percent earned $75,000 to $99,999, and 18 percent earned more than $100,000. evidence of extraordinary black progress has been underreported -- indeed minimized -- in recent years. that reality notwithstanding, there has been consistent and considerable achievement. given the historical treatment of african americans in school and in society, perhaps the most striking accomplishment has been in the rising levels of educational attainment. the economic gains have been more incremental. but neither set of gains can or should be ignored.
