this article is part of the debatable newsletter. you can sign up here to receive it on tuesdays and thursdays. happy new year! depending on how you look at things, it's either the fourth day of january 2022 or the 674th day of march 2020. perhaps you've never bought into the tradition of new year's resolutions. maybe you're considering setting some for the first time. or perhaps you've participated in the past, but as the largest wave yet of coronavirus cases crashes over the country, you simply can't muster the motivation this year. are new year's resolutions still a worthwhile exercise right now? are they ever? and what actually makes a resolution good enough to keep? here's what people are saying. there's no shortage of defensible reasons to think, as the atlantic's faith hill does, that "resolutions are not the vibe for 2022." they're too acquisitive, training our envious attentions on the wealth, status and achievements of others. they're irredeemably vain, another lesson in obedience to a culture that imposes unrealistic beauty standards and profits off our doomed attempts to meet them. and resolutions don't work for most people anyway: according to a 1988 study from the university of scranton that followed 200 resolvers over a two-year period, only 19 percent had managed to maintain their pledges to the end. this year, many americans appear to be defecting from the tradition. just 29 percent of americans say they would be making new year's resolutions, down from 43 percent a year ago, according to a recent cbs poll. the decline may stem in part from pandemic-related uncertainty. this year, as in many recent years, losing weight ranks at or near the top of the list of americans' most popular resolutions. but, as axios reports, the emergence of the omicron variant threatens to flatten the annual bump in gym memberships. "it's not even about us," stasia savasuk, a style coach, told the cut's annaliese griffin. "if we're like, i'm going to go to the gym five days a week, and then your gym shuts down because of covid, you're screwed.'" an inability to plan may also frustrate another perennially popular resolution: saving more money. as omicron surges, most pandemic relief has ended. student loan bills teeter interminably on the verge of again coming due. and the current spike of inflation -- the fastest increase in consumer prices since 1982 -- is taking a bite out of americans' paychecks. "for those that are trying to pay down debt or catch up on savings, it is very much an obstacle to progress," said greg mcbride, chief financial analyst at bankrate. so what's the alternative to the self-improvement imperative? hill, for her part, has put together a list of "small good things" from 2021: getting to visit home; baking tomato bread pudding with family; growing closer with friends; getting vaccinated. "these aren't accomplishments -- they're more like gratitudes, or bright points, or road signs for my future self to follow," she writes. "they remind me that my life can be beautifully inconsequential, and the things that make me most human are not particularly unique or impressive." commercialized as new year's may be, it would be unfair to dismiss resolutions as merely the trappings of a hallmark holiday. as arthur c. brooks has noted in the atlantic, humans have celebrated the holiday and made resolutions in one form or another for thousands of years. in ancient rome, for example, jan. 1 was an occasion to honor the two-faced god janus through offerings, feasts and promises to behave more virtuously. it was only in recent decades that the custom became synonymous with weight loss. "what did people resolve before we had the scourge of cellulite and the temptation of mcrib to stir us to action?" the atlantic's olga khazan asked in 2013. "the answer: just to be a better person, apparently. resolutions from the early 20th century ranged from swearing less, to having a more cheerful disposition, to recommitting to god." the promise of new beginnings is powerful and, it turns out, not exclusively metaphorical. a 2014 study from researchers at wharton called it "the fresh start effect": when the passage of time is clearly demarcated by "temporal landmarks," the mind creates new "mental accounting periods" that "relegate past imperfections to a previous period, induce people to take a big-picture view of their lives, and thus motivate aspirational behaviors." the start of a new year can function as one such temporal landmark, but so too can the start of a new week, the wharton researchers found. "it's not like there's something magical about dec. 31," charles duhigg, a former times reporter and the author of "the power of habit," said in 2018. "what is magical is our mind's capacity to create new narratives for ourselves, and to look for events as an opportunity to change the narrative." other recent research has challenged the conventional wisdom about the futility of resolutions. a 2020 study of over 1,000 resolvers published in the journal plos one, which billed itself as "probably the largest and most comprehensive study on new year's resolutions conducted thus far," found that 55 percent of responders considered themselves successful at a one-year follow-up. and even one of the authors of the 1988 scranton study later pointed out that the success rate of resolvers is 10 times the success rate of adults who want to change behavior but don't make resolutions. "i was tired of people saying resolutions never succeed," he told npr in 2008. "these are life-sustaining behaviors." if you're going to set resolutions this year, experts recommend interrogating your motivations to guide your goal-setting process. according to richard m. ryan, a professor at the institute for positive psychology and education at australian catholic university and an influential theorist of human motivation, there are two classes of goals: ryan's research shows that intrinsic goals make us happier than extrinsic ones. "even if you're successful in extrinsic gains, they have a double-edged sword: they cost you as much as they get you in happiness," he told griffin at the cut. "the evidence shows that when people reflectively and mindfully get in touch with their values, they drop the stuff like weight loss; they drop the stuff like 'make more money or more possessions.'" in other cases, an extrinsic goal and an intrinsic goal may look alike but flow from distinct motivations -- and that can make all the difference, the times's christina caron wrote in 2020. "for example, if you know you'd like to lose weight, is it because you're trying to conform to society's standards about body size? is it because your doctor told you to do it? those are external motivators, which are less likely to help you reach your goal," she explained. "on the other hand, if losing weight appeals to you because eating healthy foods and exercising make you feel physically and mentally better, those are internal motivations that will make you more likely to build new, long-term habits." once you've set goals, a popular management practice is to make them smart, an acronym for specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound. jen a. miller broke down the concept in the times's smarter living guide to making and keeping resolutions: and if after diligent planning, you still fail? in the view of tish harrison warren, a times opinion writer, that's just fine. "i'd argue that the chief value of resolutions is not found in our success or failure at keeping them," she writes. "instead, they help us reflect on what our lives are like, what we would like them to be like and what practices might bridge the difference. there is hope in the idea that we can change -- that we can keep growing, learning and trying new things. this hope of renewal is the point of resolutions for me." do you have a point of view we missed? email us at debatable@nytimes.com. please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter. "sometimes you have to hate exercise before you can love it again" [the new york times] "why we make resolutions (and why they fail)" [the new yorker] "resolve to think bigger in 2022" [the new york times] "diet culture is unhealthy. it's also immoral." [the new york times]
