on the march weekend just before indoor dining in new york city was banned for the first time this year, i ate out on friday night. i ate out on saturday night, too. that was partly because i had a friend in town but mostly because i love restaurants. i live in restaurants. many of us new yorkers do -- or, i should say, many of us new yorkers did. we can't live in restaurants anymore, and the consequence is that many restaurants no longer live. about a week ago, indoor dining was banned anew -- for how long, nobody knows. that could be the death knell for many of the restaurants that are still hanging on, barely. there has been a war in our city, which is the greatest restaurant city in america, pitting owners and managers and cooks and bartenders and servers and dishwashers against an invisible invader. on too many fronts and in too many instances, the invader is winning. and it's not just the owners and managers and cooks and bartenders and servers and dishwashers who are losing -- though their pain, make no mistake, is most acute. it's all of us, and we have absolutely no idea how much we've lost. i thought about this the other day, as i looked at the latest list of casualties. i take in these compendiums the way i walk through war memorials, pausing at each name to appreciate the magnitude of all of them put together. but in this case, i suddenly realized, the mourning hasn't fully begun, because so many of the mourners are in the dark. away from the city or cloistered in our apartments or hesitant to visit communal spaces until the pandemic ebbs, we won't know or register that a beloved trattoria is gone until some safer day when we try to make a reservation and learn that there's nothing at 8 p.m. or even at 5:30 p.m. because there's nothing, period. until we walk down the street where sated brunch-goers once spilled out of our favorite bistro and see an empty, still patch of sidewalk instead. maybe a chinese restaurant across the way will also be shuttered, along with a ramen place around the corner. commerce-wise, whole patches of new york city are becoming ghost towns. we just haven't been out and about enough to commune with the ghosts. the tragedy is national of course, and it has had profound effects on the american economy because, as matt goulding noted in the atlantic, the restaurant industry "generates $900 billion a year and employs 15 million people." he meant in normal times. that's what it did generate; that's what it did employ. not now. the headline on the article referred to the pandemic as "an extinction event for america's restaurants," and that was in june, when summer was upon us and the worst was supposedly behind us. it turned out that the worst was yet to come and the extinction metaphor would have to be refined. in new york magazine this month, carl swanson compared the continuing disappearance of restaurants and other small businesses to when "that asteroid hit the yucatan 66 million years back, chilling the atmosphere just enough to set in motion a cascade of effects that wiped out an entire dense ecosystem." he was focused on new york city, where the damage has been especially severe. a few months ago, the new york state comptroller estimated that as many as half of the roughly 24,000 restaurants that operated in the city at the start of 2020 would be out of business soon into 2021. "new york is the perfect storm," the chef and restaurateur camilla marcus told me: it has a winter that inhibits outdoor dining, limited space for that in the first place, punishing rents that strain restaurants' budgets and interiors that need to be packed tight with customers for the numbers to work. marcus had to close her nearly three-year-old restaurant, west-bourne, in downtown manhattan in september and is a founder of roar (relief opportunities for all restaurants), which lobbies and raises relief funds for unemployed restaurant workers. in contrast to airlines, the restaurant industry has received no targeted federal bailout -- even though it has traditionally, by some estimates, employed more than 10 times as many people. "i'm not an economist," marcus said, "but how that doesn't deserve an industry-specific relief package is beyond me." me, too. the house passed such legislation two and a half months ago, but the senate didn't follow suit. i worry that many americans downgrade the fates of restaurants, regarding them as conveniences and indulgences -- shouldn't we all be cooking more, anyway? -- instead of the job creators and economic forces that they are. "people don't understand how large a ripple effect on the economy one 30-seat restaurant can have," said gabriel stulman, who has had to close two of his nine manhattan restaurants. what dies along with a restaurant is money that went to a landlord, to food producers, to food deliverers, to linen suppliers, to appliance repair workers. "for most people in our industry, 90 cents of every dollar that we make goes back into the economy in one form or another," stulman told me. that's the financial arithmetic. what about the social and emotional math? restaurants often anchor the neighborhoods that they're in and attract additional businesses. they're engines of urban renewal. they're cultural ambassadors, introducing the spirit and traditions of a given country or ethnic group to customers whose souls as well as their bellies grow bigger for it. i'm no impartial judge. i spent more than five years, from 2004 to 2009, as the times's restaurant critic, so i know many of the creative, hard-working, humble people whose existences have been upended. they have responded more with grace and determination than with self-pity or rage, quickly and cleverly adapting their operations as best they can. some restaurants now sell groceries. some used shrubs and trellises to fashion veritable edens on the sidewalk. but no amount of ingenuity could save other restaurants. uncle boons, one of my favorite thai spots, didn't make it. i'll miss its crab fried rice, but more than that i'll miss introducing it to friends and relatives and gazing at their contented expressions as we nourished ourselves in so many ways at once. momofuku's ssam bar is gone. i had two different, terrible dates there and remember thinking that so long as the chef david chang's food was in the mix and all those pork-struck sybarites were eating and drinking around me, any romantic torture was survivable. restaurants symbolize not just high points and low points but also whole chapters of our lives, whole facets of our identities. they're part of the topography of our journeys -- the part with criminally good tacos and a lethal margarita. many decades after the fact, my siblings and i still reminisce about remington's, a restaurant in southern california where we often celebrated christmas eve in the years just before our mother died. "remember the size of those steaks?" one of us will say, but we're not talking about beef. we're talking about grief -- or, rather, about the joy and innocence that preceded it. remington's closed long ago, because that happens to restaurants. they fall out of favor. they fall on hard times. but they don't fall with this suddenness -- bustling one day, barricaded the next. they don't fall in these numbers. it's as if pages of a cherished scrapbook are being ripped out and thrown away, one after another after another. we're losing the past along with the present and the future. we're losing the very refuges we might have gone to for solace.
