the first seven months of the biden presidency have been easy compared with what's coming down the pike. key provisions of covid relief legislation came to an end on aug. 1, with more set to follow -- including a cessation of moratoriums on evictions and mortgage foreclosures, termination of extended unemployment benefits (which carried $300-a-week supplemental payments) and a stop to enhanced food stamp subsidies and student loan forbearance. the prospect of millions of families forced from their homes as covid variants infect growing numbers of people provoked frenzied attempts by the white house and congressional democrats to take emergency steps to halt or ameliorate the potential chaos and a possible tragedy of national proportions. on tuesday, the centers for disease control and prevention ordered a 60-day freeze on evictions -- although the order faces possible rejection by the courts. "any call for a moratorium, based on the supreme court's recent decision, is likely to face obstacles," biden told reporters, adding that the "bulk of the constitutional scholarship says that it's not likely to pass constitutional muster." in a june report, the census bureau found that 1,401,801 people 18 and older living in rental housing were "very likely" to be evicted and 2,248,120 were "somewhat likely." in addition, 345,556 people were "very likely" to lose their homes through mortgage foreclosure, and 746,030 were "somewhat likely" to face foreclosure and the loss of their homes. the combined total was 4.7 million adults. the eviction crisis has come at a time when an additional series of potentially damaging developments have come to the fore. the rate of inflation has been rising at its fastest pace in over a decade -- to 5.4 percent in june, from 1.4 percent in january when biden took office, with no end in sight. the number of homicides grew by 25 percent from 2019 to 2020, and the 2021 rate, 6.2 homicides per 100,000 residents, is on track to become, according to the washington post, "the highest recorded in the united states in more than 20 years." the number of illegal border crossings has more than doubled during biden's seven months in office, raising the potential for immigration to become a central campaign issue once again, both next year and in 2024. u.s. customs and border protection reported that in june of this year the enforcement agency "encountered 188,829 persons attempting entry along the southwest border," a 142 percent increase from the 78,000 in january 2021 when biden assumed the presidency. as the 2022 and 2024 elections get closer, biden is in a race to keep public attention on policies and initiatives favorable to the democratic party and its candidates against the continuing threat that inflation, crime, urban disorder and illegal immigration -- all issues that favor the republican party -- take center stage. the danger for biden if crime and immigration become primary issues of public attention is clear in polling data. the realclearpolitics average of the eight most recent polls shows biden's favorability at plus 7.5 points (51.1 positive and 43.6 negative) and that the public generally approves of his handling of the covid pandemic, of jobs, of the economy and of the environment. regarding biden's handling of crime and immigration, however, the numbers go negative. in the july 17-20 economist/yougov poll, 38 percent of voters approved of his handling of crime, and 45 percent disapproved. in the economist/yougov poll taken a week later, biden's numbers on immigration were worse: 35 approving, 50 disapproving. the biden administration has initiated a set of programs designed to "stem the flow of guns into the hands of those responsible for violence" -- the centerpiece of its anti-crime program -- but the economist/yougov poll found in its july 24-27 survey that 30 percent of voters approve of biden's handling of gun issues while 48 percent disapprove what does this all portend? bruce cain, a political scientist at stanford, replied by email to my inquiry: cain argues that sean westwood, a political scientist at dartmouth, has a very different take. in an email he wrote: biden, westwood continued, biden received a lift last week in keeping a bread-and-butter agenda front and center from an unexpected source, mitch mcconnell, the senate minority leader. mcconnell abandoned his dr. no stance toward all things democratic and joined 16 fellow republicans in support of a key motion to take up a $1 trillion infrastructure spending bill. if enacted into law, the measure would legitimize biden's claim that he is capable of restoring a semblance of bipartisanship in the nation's capital. mcconnell has not fully explained his political reasoning, but his tactical shift suggests that he thinks the wind remains at biden's back, making the republican strategy of destruction a much riskier proposition, at least for the moment. early indicators suggest that in some ways biden has yet to face the kind of voter opposition that characterized the administrations of his predecessors from both parties at this stage in their presidencies. matt grossmann, a political scientist at michigan state, tweeted on aug. 2: similarly, g. elliott morris, a data journalist for the economist, wrote on aug. 1 that there is a long-term "trend by which the people react in a thermostatic manner against the party in power," with the public mood shifting to the right during democratic presidencies and to the left during republican presidencies. so far during the biden presidency, morris wrote, the expected tilt toward conservatism has not materialized: the trickiest issues facing the biden administration are crime and urban disorder because these are issues that play to the advantage of conservatives, who have demonstrated expertise in weaponizing them. the june 29-july 6 usa today/ipsos poll found that "concerns about crime and gun violence have surged to the top of issues that worry americans" and, in an ominous note for the biden administration, there is considerable disagreement over the optimal strategy for democrats to adopt when addressing crime -- along with widespread concern over the party's credibility on the issue itself. rebecca goldstein, a law professor at the university of california, berkeley, emailed to say that she believes "the biden administration has correctly read the political winds by doubling the amount they are requesting for police hiring grants in 2022 compared to the 2021 appropriation, and also requesting eight-figure sums for police training and body-worn cameras." these initiatives, goldstein continued, are "not the outcome that any of last summer's activists would have wanted. but the biden administration has realized that some of those proposals, particularly defunding or abolishing police agencies, were politically dead on arrival." the crucial question, in goldstein's view, is stanley feldman, a political scientist at stony brook university, argued in an email that trying to engage voters on crime and other issues that have worked to the advantage of the republican party in the past is a fool's errand: crime and policing, feldman noted, aaron chalfin, a professor of criminology at the university of pennsylvania, agrees that engaging in the debate over crime is inherently risky for democrats: lawrence sherman, director of the cambridge center for evidence-based policing at the university of cambridge, agrees that "the greatest threat to biden on policing and disorder comes from the left," but he differs from some of his colleagues in arguing that biden should take the issues of crime and urban dysfunction head on. sherman contends that public anxieties over crime are just one part of a larger, more comprehensive "fear of chaos." in that more expansive context, sherman continued, biden has strengthened his credentials as an adversary of disorder through his work trump's actions leading up to and during the jan. 6 assault on the capitol by trump loyalists seeking to disrupt the vote count have opened the door for biden to take the initiative on law and order and, in doing so, to counter the image of the democratic party as soft on crime, sherman argued: "after what trump did on jan. 6, biden has been able to stress his own historic support for the police as emblematic of his opposition to chaos," sherman wrote in an email: biden should take the initiative, sherman argues, with "a major policing initiative," and that initiative should stress "hot spots policing," the focusing of police resources on small sections of urban areas, "under 5 percent of land in most cities," while "pulling way back on stop and frisk everywhere else, especially suburban traffic stops, like the late sandra bland." biden goes into battle with one crucial advantage: he, his appointees and his advisers have more experience in the trenches of elections, legislative fights and bureaucratic maneuvering than the top personnel of any recent administration. on the other hand, if what his voters need is equality -- that is, resource redistribution -- experienced advisers may not be enough. mart trasberg and hector bahamonde, of wake forest university and the universidad de o'higgins in chile, authors of "inclusive institutions, unequal outcomes: democracy, state capacity, and income inequality," pointed out in an email that redistribution is exceptionally hard to achieve in an advanced democracy like the one in operation in the united states: in the end, much of the dynamism that powers today's political competition comes back to -- or down to -- racial and cultural conflict. can biden find a redistributive workaround -- and protect voting rights at the same time? the fate of the democratic party depends on it.
