should responsibility for the rampant polarization that characterizes american politics today be laid at the feet of liberals or conservatives? i posed that question to my friend bill galston, a senior fellow at brookings and a columnist at the wall street journal. he emailed me his reply: once the conflict enters the political arena, though, other factors come into play, galston argues: galston put it like this: along with intensity, another driving force in escalating polarization, in galston's view, is elite behavior: the race and gender issues that have come to play such a central role in american politics are rooted in the enormous changes in society from the 1950s to the 1970s, galston wrote: one of the biggest changes in the country in the wake of the civil rights and immigration reforms of the 1950s, '60s and '70s has been in the demographic makeup of the nation. seventy years ago, the country was 89.5 percent white, according to the census. by 2019, the white share of the population fell to 60.1 percent. in 2019, pew research reported: in many ways, this transformation posed a challenge to customary social expectations. "how would the progressive cultural program deal with traditionalist dissent?" galston asked: recently two columnists who are hardly sympathetic to trump or trumpism -- far from it -- raised questions about whether the right or the left deserves blame or responsibility for the kind of conflicts that now roil elections. kevin drum, in "if you hate the culture wars, blame liberals," and damon linker, in "the myth of asymmetric polarization," make the case that the left has been the aggressor in the culture wars. "it is not conservatives who have turned american politics into a culture war battle. it is liberals. and this shouldn't come as a surprise," drum wrote. "almost by definition, liberals are the ones pushing for change while conservatives are merely responding to whatever liberals do." linker took this a step further, arguing that progressives do not want to acknowledge that "on certain issues wrapped up with the culture war, democrats have moved further and faster to the left than republicans have moved to the right," because to do so "would require that they cede some of the moral high ground in their battles with conservatives, since it would undermine the preferred progressive narrative according to which the right is motivated entirely by bad faith and pure malice." drum and linker were quickly followed by other commentators, including peggy noonan, a conservative columnist for the wall street journal, who wrote a piece that was summed up nicely by its headline: "the culture war is a leftist offensive." i asked jacob hacker, a political scientist at yale, for his assessment of the drum and linker arguments, and he wrote back: hacker provided me with a graphic of ideological trends from 1969 to 2020 in house and senate voting by party that clearly shows much more movement to the right among republicans than movement to the left among democrats. there is substantial evidence in support of hacker's argument that republican politicians and strategists have led the charge in raising hot-button issues. on june 24, for example, representative jim banks of indiana, chairman of the republican study committee -- a group of conservative members of the house -- sent out a memo telling colleagues: the letter ends: "my encouragement to you is lean into it. lean into the culture war." at the state legislative level, the associated press -- in an april story, "in g.o.p. strongholds, a big push on 'culture war' legislation" -- cited a surge in legislation restricting transgender surgery and banning the teaching of critical race theory. in this view, the left may start culture war conflicts, but the right is far more aggressive in politicizing them, both in legislative chambers and in political campaigns. conversely, andrew sullivan, in "what happened to you? the radicalization of the american elite against liberalism," makes the case that the extreme left has created a hostile environment not only for conservatives but also for traditional liberals: drum and linker base much of their argument on pew research data (illustrated by the graphic below) to prove that the democratic party has shifted much farther to the left than the republican party has shifted to the right. on a zero (very liberal) to 10 (very conservative) scale, drum wrote, "between 1994 and 2017, democrats had gotten three points more liberal while republicans had gotten about half a point more conservative." jocelyn kiley, associate director for political research at pew, argues, however, that her data shows something quite different. the pew analysis is based on responses to 10 questions, each of which asks subjects to pick between two alternatives -- for example, "government is almost always wasteful" versus "government often does a better job than people give it credit for," or "homosexuality should be discouraged by society" versus "homosexuality should be accepted by society." in recent years, kiley wrote in an email, in addition, kiley noted, the democratic shift to the left reflects in large part a parallel shift in the general public. the median voter has become more liberal, and as a result, in 2017 democratic voters were modestly closer to the median voter than republican voters (by one point on a 20-point scale). i asked brian schaffner, a principal investigator at the cooperative election study and a political scientist at tufts, about the drum and linker columns. schaffner made an argument similar to kiley's: schaffner observes that the data ryan enos, a political scientist at harvard, took the schaffner argument a step further: democrats, enos continued, it would be wrong, enos concluded, "to think cultural change is all about politics." the pew data is based on questions first developed in 1994 and include none of the contentious contemporary issues that have provoked pushback against the left wing of the democratic party. in a march 12 column published before his "myth of asymmetric polarization" essay, linker himself assigned responsibility to trump and to republicans for a climate in which "it sometimes seems as if the culture war has swallowed up everything in american politics." linker traces this phenomenon to andra gillespie, a political scientist at emory, expanded on this point in an email: recent data, gillespie wrote, shows that republicans are far more likely to believe in qanon or that significant proportions of republicans believe that the 2020 election was stolen, despite a wealth of evidence to the contrary. this, gillespie contends, is the reason "that the public discourse is focusing on right-wing extremism right now." as the 2022 election comes into view, the key issue is less the question of which party is the aggressor in the culture wars than whether republicans can gin up enough controversy over the so-called woke agenda to make it salient to voters on election day, regardless of whether or not responsibility for these issues can reasonably be attributed to the democratic party. linker's march 12 column, "will the gop's culture war gambit blow up in its face?," describes the difficulties facing the republican party in achieving this goal. at the moment, the electorate faces but there's a catch, linker continued: if right-wing manipulation of cultural and racial issues does end up backfiring, that will defy the long history of the republican party's successful deployment of divisive wedge issues -- from richard nixon to ronald reagan to george h.w. bush to newt gingrich to george w. bush to donald trump. republicans have repeatedly demonstrated that the half-life of these radioactive topics is longer than expected, and democrats, if they want to protect their fragile majority, must be doubly careful not to hand their adversaries ever more powerful weapons.
