it is no wonder that republican leaders in the house do not want to convene a truth and reconciliation commission to scrutinize the jan. 6 attack on the capitol. the more attention drawn to the events of that day, the more their party has to lose. immediately after the riot, support for president donald trump fell sharply among republicans, according to surveys conducted by kevin arceneaux of sciences po paris and rory truex of princeton. the drop signaled that republicans would have to pay a price for the trump-inspired insurrection, the violent spirit of which was captured vividly by peter baker and sabrina tavernise of the times: republican revulsion toward the riot was, however, short-lived. arceneaux and truex, in their paper "donald trump and the lie," point out that republican voter identification with trump had "rebounded to pre-election levels" by jan. 13. the authors measured identification with trump by responses to two questions: "when people criticize donald trump, it feels like a personal insult," and "when people praise donald trump, it makes me feel good." the same pattern emerged in the republican party's favorability ratings, which dropped by 13 points between the beginning and the end of january, but gained 11 points back by april, according to nbc/wall street journal surveys. mitch mcconnell himself was outraged. in a feb. 13 speech on the senate floor he said: memorably, mcconnell went on: mcconnell's indignation was also short-lived. less than two weeks later, on feb. 25, mcconnell told fox news that if trump were the nominee in 2024, he would "absolutely" support the former president. representative andrew clyde of georgia nearly matched mcconnell's turn-on-a-dime. as the washington post reported on tuesday, mcconnell and clyde's turnabouts came as no surprise to students of the senate minority leader or scholars of american politics. gary jacobson of the university of california-san diego wrote in an email that "the public's reaction to the riot, like everything else these days, is getting assimilated into the existing polarized configuration of political attitudes and opinions." jacobson added: along similar lines, paul frymer, a political scientist at princeton, suggested that voters have developed a form of scandal fatigue: while this mass amnesia seems incomprehensible to some, an august 2019 paper, "tribalism is human nature," by cory jane clark, the executive director of the adversarial collaboration research center at the university of pennsylvania, and three fellow psychologists, provides fundamental insight into the evanescing impact of jan. 6 on the electorate and on republicans in particular: the human mind, clark and her colleagues wrote, in large-scale contemporary studies, the authors continue, within this framework, there are two crucial reasons that politics is "one of the most fertile grounds for bias," clark and her co-authors write: clark argues further, in an email, that rising influence of "tribalism" in politics results in part from the growing "clarity and homogeneity of the democrat and republican coalitions," with the result that "people are better able to find their people, sort into their ideological bubbles, find their preferred news sources, identify their preferred political elites and follow them, and signal their political allegiance to fellow group members (and attain friends and status that way)." sarah binder, a political scientist at george washington university, adds some detail: in this context, kevin mccarthy's announcement on may 18 that the house republican leadership opposes the creation of a jan. 6 commission is of a piece with the ouster of liz cheney from her position as chair of the house republican conference, according to binder. at the end of the day, binder continued, alexander g. theodoridis of the university of massachusetts-amherst wrote in an email that "the half-life of jan. 6 memory has proven remarkably short given the objectively shocking nature of what took place at the capitol that day." this results in part from the fact that a umass april 21-23 national survey asked voters to identify the person or group "you hold most responsible for the violence that occurred at the capitol building." 45 percent identified trump, 6 percent the republican party and 11 percent white nationalists. the surprising finding was the percentage that blamed the left, broadly construed: 16 percent for the democratic party, 4 percent for joe biden and 11 percent for "antifa," for a total of 31 percent. the refusal of republicans to explore the takeover of the capitol reflects a form of biased reasoning that is not limited to the right or the left, but may be more dangerous on the right. ariel malka, a professor at yeshiva university and an author of "who is open to authoritarian governance within western democracies?," agreed in an email that both liberals and conservatives "engage in biased reasoning on the basis of partisanship," but, he argued, there is still a fundamental difference between left and right: these differences are "transforming the republican party into an anti-democratic institution," according to malka: in the paper, malka, yphtach lelkes, bert n. bakker and eliyahu spivack, of the university of pennsylvania, the university of amsterdam and yeshiva university, ask: "what type of western citizens would be most inclined to support democracy-degrading actions?" their answer is twofold. first, second, julie wronski of the university of mississippi replied to my inquiry about jan. 6 suggesting that democrats appear to have made a strategic decision against pressing the issue too hard: democrats, wronski continued, appear to have taken in a twist, wronski suggests that it may be to democrats' advantage to stay out of the jan. 6 debate in order to let it fester within republican ranks: republican leaners "seem to be moving away from the party when hearing about intraparty conflict regarding the legitimacy of joe biden's win," wronski wrote, citing a may 14 paper by katherine clayton, a graduate student in political science at stanford. clayton finds that wronski writes that jeff greenfield, writing in politico, takes an opposing position in his may 12 article, "a g.o.p. civil war? don't bet on it": more significant, greenfield continued, despite trump's overt attempt to subvert the election, greenfield observes, and the challenge facing democrats goes beyond winning office. they confront an adversary willing to lie about past election outcomes, setting the stage for republican legislatures to overturn future election returns; an opponent willing to nurture an insurrection if the wrong people win; a political party moving steadily from democracy to authoritarianism; a party that despite its liabilities is more likely than not to regain control of the house and possibly even the senate in the 2022 midterm elections. the advent of trump republicans poses an unprecedented strategic quandary for democrats, a quandary they have not resolved and that may not lend itself to resolution.
