joe biden is now the president, even as a block of roughly 35 to 40 million republican voters remains convinced that his victory on nov. 3 was illegitimate, despite his capture of a decisive majority of the popular vote and the electoral college. with jubilation in some quarters, rage in others, the electorate is split, 49-50, on whether they are "confident that biden will make the right decisions for the country's future," according to a jan. 17 washington post/abc news survey, well above donald trump's 38 percent in 2017, but below barack obama's 61 percent in 2009. biden may look battered and worn, but he possesses a rudimentary integrity that has been missing from the oval office for the last four years. he faces a staggering array of challenges, not least within congress and the judiciary on which he will rely to enact and uphold his ambitious agenda. i asked scholars who explore issues of social conflict and polarization about the predicament biden finds himself in. there were optimists and pessimists. if recent history provides a guide, the pessimists may well carry the day. in an email, theda skocpol, a sociologist and political scientist at harvard, described some of the pressures at work: skocpol continued: what skocpol calls the "the overt extremism of the trumpists" -- reflected in the mob assault on the capitol on jan. 6 -- has also been manifested in the refusal of much of the republican establishment to accept the incontrovertible evidence that biden won both the popular and electoral college vote in november. at the same time, the republican party is split (although not evenly) over this refusal, over trump's incitement of the jan. 6 riot, which mitch mcconnell now points to, and over the second trump impeachment. it is possible that this set of circumstances offers the incoming biden administration an opportunity to pick up republican support for some of its key priorities, which include a $1.9 trillion economic stimulus and covid relief bill, expansion of lgbt rights and a major immigration reform measure that provides an avenue to citizenship for roughly 11 million undocumented immigrants. if no republicans sign up, the administration will have to rely on 100 percent support among democratic senators. regardless of the biden administration's short-term success or failure, julie wronski, a political scientist at the university of mississippi, contends in an email that the united states is approaching, or has already reached, ungovernability. wronski argues that wronski sees the unruliness of the nation as possibly dooming biden's best efforts. "biden has a long, uphill road ahead of him coming into the presidency," she wrote: harold james, a historian at princeton, goes a step further. he warned that not only is american politics under extreme pressure, the larger social order is too -- the kind of pressure that produced both national and international crises during the past two centuries: biden, james wrote, "is the anti-trump, with a personality that is soothing, healing, not combative," but, he cautioned, "having said that, it is the reality of the performance, in the short run on combating the pandemic, in the longer perspective on building better access to resources rather than the benign nature of the personality that will dictate the character of the legacy." some of those i contacted argued that whether the nation and the congress continue on a path of bitter division or whether a lessening of hostility prevails lies less in the hands of the biden administration than in the hands of republicans, many of whom have become reflexively and adamantly opposed to all things democratic. brian schaffner, a professor of political science at tufts, cautioned that republicans hold the whip hand, that the governability of "america going forward depends in large part on whether republican politicians return to an unequivocal adherence to democratic norms, or whether they decide to continue further down the path of trumpism." the likelihood that republicans, or a substantial share of them, will change course is not high. schaffner continued: kevin arceneaux, a professor of political science at temple, also has doubts about the prospects for republican cooperation: this could be ameliorated if a substantial block of republicans in congress "were to take a strong stand and discipline members who fail to recognize the legitimacy of the biden administration," creating what arceneaux called a "democracy-first front," but the odds are against that, to put it mildly. i asked arceneaux if biden's goal of bipartisanship is pie in the sky: there are those who are cautiously optimistic, who note the newly visible power of black voters, striking gains in biden's high-level appointments of african-americans and his commitment to reverse trump's anti-immigration policies. some of these scholars believe that the trump-inspired assault on the capitol on jan. 6 may also open a window of opportunity for bipartisan cooperation. ryan enos, a political scientist at harvard, noted that the events of jan. 6, enos wrote by email, transformed all that: enos concluded: leonie huddy, a professor of political scientist at stony brook university, expanded on this point: expanding further, stephen ansolabehere, a professor of government at harvard, wrote in an email: biden, in ansolabehere's view, does have one significant weakness: if biden remains committed to a restoration of bipartisanship in congress, his administration, in ansolabehere's view, will face an ongoing struggle as it attempts to balance the demands of the progressive wing of the democratic party while recruiting at least a few republicans. "i would not be surprised to see a big infrastructure bill with a lot of money for roads, airports and energy," ansolabehere said. "that is the kind of measure that would get everybody on board." isabel sawhill, a senior fellow at brookings, described biden's task as monumental: "how does president biden govern in the face of these culturally oriented divisions?" she proposed that he adopt the following strategy: there are others who believe that biden has already come close to doing the exact opposite of what sawhill proposes. david frum, a speechwriter for george w. bush, a leading never-trumper and a staff writer for the atlantic, tweeted on jan. 17: one question i posed to the scholars and analysts i contacted was: how governable is a country in which a substantial proportion of the voters believe an election was stolen? in response, david bell, a professor of history at princeton, pointed out that: musa al-gharbi, a fellow in columbia's department of sociology, has focused on the contested issue of retaining african-american and hispanic loyalty to the democratic party. in an email, he wrote: the accompanying chart, put together by the demographer william frey, a senior fellow at brookings, illustrates the problem. in partisan trends from 2016 to 2020, there has been a 3-point democratic gain among white people, a six-point drop among black americans, a five-point drop among hispanic-americans and an 11-point drop among asian-americans from 2016 to 2020. what this means, al-gharbi continued, is that democrats, in making appeals to minority voters, should shift away from "more woke symbolism and rhetoric, appointing a diverse cabinet, etc." and instead "focus on bread-and-butter issues that affect normal people. indeed, for what it's worth, this would probably help them hold their support with many whites as well." the size and scope of the opposition forces biden faces are difficult to overestimate. raymond d. horton, a professor at columbia's graduate school of business, writes that trump's electoral base has felt for some time that horton sees problems ahead: the opposition forces have been gaining steam for more than five decades, driven by opposition to the civil rights movement and what they perceive as the threat posed to the traditional family by women's rights and the sexual revolution. the economic dislocation in white working- and middle-class communities starting in the early 1970s has intensified anger and discontent. the incorporation of these sources of resentment under the umbrella of the republican party and the mobilization of this rage by donald trump has unleashed a force in american politics that is not yet spent. still, there is a new generation coming. brian schaffner wrote me in an email: it will be another decade before these millennial and gen z voters reach levels in the electorate powerful enough to shift the direction of national politics away from the obsolete doctrine of white supremacy. it can't happen soon enough.
