america is embedded in a world that is troubled by insidious parallel variants of the same structural problems -- anti-immigrant fervor, political tribalism, racism, ethnic tension, authoritarianism and inequality -- that led to a right-wing takeover of the federal government by donald trump. the peculiarly american characteristics of the trump years have blinded us to the spread of this radical disorder worldwide -- even as some prescient scholars and analysts have seen the connections all along and have been trying to make the public aware of them. according to the stanford sociologists michelle jackson and david grusky, there is a common thread to these seemingly disparate developments -- what they call "the ubiquity of loss" -- a condition the authors describe as a "late industrial experience, in short, increasingly one of omnipresent loss and decline." the authors elaborate in their paper, "a post-liberal theory of stratification." loss like this, they write, can be the commonality of loss has fostered the emergence of politicians and political strategists whom jackson and grusky call "norm entrepreneurs" -- trump, steve bannon, jeremy corbyn, marine le pen, nigel farage -- who the politics of loss have, in turn, empowered the populist right by encouraging the view "that disadvantaged groups have unfairly benefited from legal protections, egalitarian social movements and government and charitable assistance. these initiatives, far from facilitating fair and open competition, are instead seen as overshooting the mark and providing unfair advantage," ushering in "a new era of high grievance, high conflict, and high ideology." the "ubiquity of loss" is not the sole factor. there are "trends across countries, including growing nationalism, erosion of democratic norms and growth of authoritarianism," daron acemoglu, an economist at m.i.t., wrote in response to my inquiry: "the two trends affecting all of these countries are globalization and technological changes, both of which are fueling inequality and perhaps also aspirations that are going unmet." acemoglu continued: jack goldstone, a professor of public policy at george mason university, emailed me to say: these trends, goldstone wrote, have while most of the challenges "are best handled by international cooperation," goldstone argued, three recent reports explore stresses within the international order: "global trends 2040," a march publication of the national intelligence council; "2021 annual threat assessment of the u.s. intelligence community," issued by the director of national intelligence; and "poverty and shared prosperity 2020" from the world bank. the global trends report found that multinational "superstar" firms are driving economic globalization: in addition, perhaps most important, global trends notes an intensification of international resource competition: losers in the competition over resources are shifting rapidly: "the two regions with the most poor people in 1990 were east asia and pacific and south asia, which were home to 80 percent of the poor," according to the world bank. by 2015, however, "more than half of the global poor resided in sub-saharan africa and more than 85 percent of the poor resided in either sub-saharan africa or south asia." elaborating on the jackson-grusky argument, pieter vanhuysse, a political scientist at the university of southern denmark, wrote by email that a major strain on democracy is these inequalities, vanhuysse argued, one of the most important setbacks to the cause of democratic governance, in vanhuysse's view, is this trend toward autocracy, vanhuysse continues, is evident the global trends report supports vanhuysse's point: there are explicitly anti-democratic forces working to encourage the developments vanhuysse describes, according to the most recent annual threat assessment. a key factor undermining the willingness to cooperate both locally and globally is the growing threat of scarcity in jobs, basic resources and security. ronald inglehart of the university of michigan, who died in may, warned of the increasingly pervasive threat of job loss in his 2018 book, "cultural evolution": looking at the united states as a micro case study with global implications, david autor, an economist at m.i.t., found that among white voters, those who lost jobs because of trade with china moved toward the political right. "trade-exposed districts with an initial majority white population or initially in republican hands became substantially more likely to elect a conservative republican," autor and three colleagues wrote in a 2020 paper, "importing political polarization? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure." the results support "a political economy literature that connects adverse economic conditions to support for nativist or extreme politicians." daniel esty, a professor of environmental law at yale, described in an email how tribalism, hostility toward outsiders, notably immigrants, and the emergence of what some call "exclusionary nationalism" all serve to undermine prospects for global cooperation: in other words, the world's democracies are ill equipped to take on the immediate dangers cited in the annual threat assessment: an additional global development is the simultaneous aging of the populations in developed nations while the share of young people in developing countries rapidly expands. mark haas, a political scientist at duquesne university, argues that "aging will create powerful forces for international peace on the one hand and increased domestic polarization on the other." haas wrote by email: the reverse dynamics, haas continued, a similar pattern, haas wrote, exists at the societal level: what role will the united states play in addressing global tensions? goldstone, the professor of public policy at george mason, sees some hope in the biden presidency: jeffrey sachs, an economist at columbia, has a darker view: "the multiple challenges can be addressed through public action at all scales, from global to local," he wrote by email: nor is sachs upbeat about biden's chances: let's let goldstone have the last word:
