what will happen if the political tables are turned and the republican party wins the white house in 2024 and the house and senate along the way? one clue is that donald trump is an orban worshiper -- that's viktor orban, the prime minister of hungary, a case study in the aggressive pursuit of a right-wing populist agenda. in his jan. 3 announcement of support for orban's re-election, trump declared: "he is a strong leader and respected by all. he has my complete support and endorsement for re-election as prime minister!" what is it about hungary under orban that appeals so powerfully to trump? "call it 'soft fascism,' " zach beauchamp of vox wrote on sept. 13, 2018: in "how the american right fell in love with hungary" in the new york times magazine, elizabeth zerofsky quoted rod dreher, the combative conservative blogger, on orban's immigration policies -- building a fence on the border to keep muslims out, for example. "if you could wind back the clock 50 years and show the french, the belgian and the german people what mass immigration from the muslim world would do to their countries by 2021, they never, ever would have accepted it," he remarked. in contrast to conservatism as practiced in the united states, zerofsky wrote about hungary under orban: "here was this other, european tradition of catholic conservatism that was afraid neither of a strong state nor of using it to promote a conservative vision of life." in the current issue of foreign affairs, alexander cooley and daniel h. nexon, political scientists at barnard and georgetown, argued that orban has "emerged as a media darling of the american right," receiving high praise from tucker carlson, "arguably the single most influential conservative media personality in the united states." the conservative political action conference, "a major forum of the american right, plans to hold its 2022 annual meeting in hungary," cooley and nexon wrote. what has orban done to deserve this attention? the two authors briefly summarized his record: "orban consolidated power through tactics that were procedurally legal but, in substance, undercut the rule of law. he stacked the courts with partisans and pressured, captured or shut down independent media." cooley and nexon demonstrated a parallel between what has taken place in hungary and current developments in the united states: "orban's open assault on academic freedom -- including banning gender studies and evicting the central european university from hungary -- finds analogies in current right-wing efforts in republican-controlled states to ban the teaching of critical race theory and target liberal and left-wing academics." in an email, nexon elaborated: trump and orban, nexon continued, trump, in nexon's view, will be unable to match orban -- by, for example, installing a crony "as president of harvard" or forcing "yale to decamp for canada" -- but cooley stressed in an email the "active networking among right-wing political associations and groups with orban," citing the jan. 24 endorsement of orban's re-election by the new york young republican club: orban's appeal to the right flank of the republican party, in cooley's view, lies in an orban has described hungary under his rule as an "illiberal democracy." in 2019, freedom house downgraded hungary from "free" to "partly free," making it "the first country in the european union that is not currently classified" as "free," according to the budapest business journal. i asked a number of european scholars about the agenda trump and a republican-controlled congress would be most likely to push in 2025. in a march 2021 paper, "authoritarian values and the welfare state: the social policy preferences of radical right voters," philip rathgeb, a professor of social policy at the university of edinburgh, and marius r. busemeyer and alexander h.j. sahm, both of the university of konstanz, surveyed voters in eight western european countries to determine what kind of welfare state voters of populist radical-right parties want and how their preferences "differ from voters of mainstream left- and right-wing parties." rathgeb and his co-authors found that populist european voters rathgeb wrote in an email: rathgeb noted that populist parties oppose social investment policies because such programs are often based on in an email, busemeyer described some of the differences and similarities between trumpism and european populism: in addition, busemeyer wrote, "there is a strong 'corporatist' element in the trump movement (i.e., business elites), whereas in european right-wing populism that's typically not the case." the right-wing populist movements on both continents, he continued, cecile alduy, a professor at stanford who studies french politics and the far right, wrote in an email: the republican agenda, alduy argued, trump signaled his intentions at a rally last week in conroe, texas, declaring that in the case of the jan. 6 attackers, "if it requires pardons, then we will give them pardons because they are being treated so unfairly." trump went on: "if these radical, vicious, racist prosecutors do anything wrong or illegal, i hope we are going to have in this country the biggest protests we have ever had in washington, d.c.; in new york; in atlanta; and elsewhere." or take desantis, the governor of florida, who may challenge trump for the republican presidential nomination. on april 10, 2021, desantis signed the combating public disorder act into law, which his office described as "a robust approach to uphold the rule of law, to stand with those serving in law enforcement and enforce florida's zero tolerance policy for violent and disorderly assemblies." on sept. 9, u.s. district judge mark walker issued a 90-page opinion declaring that the law's "vagueness permits those in power to weaponize its enforcement against any group who wishes to express any message that the government disapproves of" and that "the lawless actions of a few rogue individuals could effectively criminalize the protected speech of hundreds, if not thousands, of law-abiding floridians." on dec. 15 desantis proposed the stop the wrongs to our kids and employees (woke) act, which would give parents the right to sue school systems if they believe their children are being taught "critical race theory," with a provision granting parents the right to collect attorneys' fees if they win. the enactment of laws encouraging citizens to become private enforcers of anti-liberal policies has become increasingly popular in republican-controlled states. glenn youngkin, the newly elected governor of virginia, created a tip line that parents can use to report teachers whose classes cover "inherently divisive concepts, including critical race theory." youngkin told an interviewer: "we're seeing dozens of g.o.p. proposals to bar whole concepts from classrooms outright," the washington post's greg sargent wrote this week: in a parallel strategy focused on abortion, texas republicans enacted the texas heartbeat act in may, legislation that not only bans abortions as soon as a fetal heartbeat is detected but also turns private citizens into enforcers of the law by giving them the power to sue abortion providers and any person who winners of such suits would receive a minimum of $10,000 plus court costs and other fees. not to be outdone, republican members of the new hampshire legislature are pushing forward legislation that proclaims that the use of citizens as informants to enforce intrusions of this sort is, to put it mildly, inconsistent with democratic norms -- reminiscent of east germany, where the stasi made use of an estimated 189,000 citizen informers. one of the early goals of a trump white house backed by republican congressional majorities, in the view of harry holzer, a professor of public policy at georgetown, would be the immediate rollback of legislation and executive orders put in place by the biden administration: a critical issue for senate republicans and a second trump administration would be whether to eliminate the filibuster to prevent democratic senators from blocking their wilder legislative plans. holzer remarked that he is sure that herbert p. kitschelt, a political scientist at duke, emailed a selection of likely republican initiatives: kitschelt cited orban as a model for trump in achieving the goals of: the politics of cultural polarization, kitschelt argued, "will intensify to re-establish the u.s. as a white christian evangelical country," although simultaneously kitschelt's last point touches on what is sure to be a major motivating force for a republican party given an extended lease on life under trump: the need to make use of every available tool -- from manipulation of election results to enactment of favorable voting laws to appeals to minority voters in the working class to instilling fear of a liberal state run amok -- to maintain the viability of a fragile coalition in which the core constituency of white noncollege voters is steadily declining as a share of the electorate. it is an uphill fight requiring leaders, at least in their minds, to consider every alternative in order to retain power, whether it's democratic or authoritarian, ethical or unethical, legal or illegal.
