"america is back" became president biden's refrain on his european trip this month, and in a narrow sense it is. we no longer have a white house aide desperately searching for a fire alarm to interrupt a president as he humiliates our country at an international news conference, as happened in 2018. and a pew research center survey found that 75 percent of those polled in a dozen countries expressed "confidence in the u.s. president to do the right thing," compared with 17 percent a year ago. yet in a larger sense, america is not back. in terms of our well-being at home and competitiveness abroad, the blunt truth is that america is lagging. in some respects, we are sliding toward mediocrity. greeks have higher high school graduation rates. chileans live longer. fifteen-year-olds in russia, poland, latvia and many other countries are better at math than their american counterparts -- perhaps a metric for where nations will stand in a generation or two. as for reading, one-fifth of american 15-year-olds can't read at the level expected of a 10-year-old. how are those millions of americans going to compete in a globalized economy? as i see it, the greatest threat to america's future is less a surging china or a rogue russia than it is our underperformance at home. we americans repeat the mantra that "we're no. 1" even though the latest social progress index, a measure of health, safety and well-being around the world, ranked the united states no. 28. even worse, the united states was one of only three countries, out of 163, that went backward in well-being over the last decade. another assessment this month, the i.m.d. world competitiveness ranking 2021, put the united states no. 10 out of 64 economies. a similar forward-looking study from the world bank ranks the united states no. 35 out of 174 countries. so it's great that we again have a president respected by the world. but we are not "back," and we must face the reality that our greatest vulnerability is not what other countries do to us but what we have done to ourselves. the united states cannot achieve its potential when so many americans are falling short of theirs. "america's chronic failure to turn its economic strength into social progress is a huge drag on american influence," said michael green, chief executive of the group that publishes the social progress index. "europeans may envy america's corporate dynamism but can comfort themselves that they are doing a much better job on a host of social outcomes, from education to health to the environment. "rivals like china may see the fraying of america's social fabric as a sign of strategic weakness," he added. "emerging economies, whose citizens are starting to enjoy quality of life ever closer to that of americans, may be less willing to take lectures from the u.s. government." biden's proposals for a refundable child credit, for national pre-k, for affordable child care and for greater internet access would help address america's strategic weaknesses. they would do more to strengthen our country than the $1.2 trillion plan pursued by american officials to modernize our nuclear arsenal. our greatest threats today are ones we can't nuke. america still has enormous strengths. its military budget is bigger than the military budgets of the next 10 countries put together. american universities are superb, and the dynamism of united states corporations is reflected in the way people worldwide use their iphones to post on their facebook pages about taylor swift songs. but they also comment, aghast, about the capitol insurrection and attempts by republicans to impede voting. american democracy was never quite as shimmering a model for the world as we liked to think, but it is certainly tarnished now. likewise, the "american dream" of upward mobility (which drew my refugee father to these shores in 1952) is increasingly chimerical. "the american dream is evidently more likely to be found on the other side of the atlantic, indeed most notably in denmark," a stanford study concluded. "these things hold us back as an economy and as a country," jerome powell, the chair of the federal reserve, said tuesday. more broadly, the united states has lost its lead in education overall and in investments in children. the world bank human capital project estimates that today's american children will achieve only 70 percent of their potential productivity. that hurts them; it also hurts our nation. we can't control whether china builds more aircraft carriers. we can't deter every russian hacker. but to truly bring america back, we should worry less about what others do and more about what we do to ourselves.
