finally, the united states appears to have an enviable record in one aspect of the pandemic. we are vaccinating our population at a rapid pace, and our supply has ramped up so much that the biden administration predicts that by may, any adult in the united states will be eligible to get shots. pfizer and moderna are on track to deliver a total of 400 million doses by the end of may and 600 million by the end of july -- that's enough to fully vaccinate 300 million people. johnson & johnson says it will deliver 20 million doses this month, with tens of millions more on the way soon. just those numbers would provide at least 80 million more vaccinations than are needed for everyone in america over the age of 16. why, then, are we sitting on tens of millions of doses of the astrazeneca vaccine  gathering dust in our warehouses when they could immediately be distributed elsewhere? as of one month ago, there were 130 countries that had not yet administered a single dose of any covid-19 vaccines. it's not that much better now. while not yet authorized by the food and drug administration, and thus unavailable to be used in the united states, the astrazeneca vaccine is already approved by the world health organization to be distributed as part of the covax initiative to provide equitable global access to covid-19 vaccines. so it could immediately start going to many countries that desperately need it right now. what's more, it has much simpler storage requirements than other vaccines, which makes it less difficult to distribute. unfortunately, the decision this week by several european countries to suspend its use because several recipients developed blood clots is only the latest in a variety of problems astrazeneca has had in its trials, reporting and rollout. a dosing error in an initial trial muddied the interpretation of efficacy results; insufficient initial data on older populations made european regulators skeptical. however, that vaccine has been widely used successfully, especially in britain, where more than 10 million doses have been administered. the results are more than encouraging. data shows the risk of hospitalization among those vaccinated with it in scotland was reduced by 94 percent, for example. despite those pauses in vaccinations in europe, the european regulatory agency has said there was "no indication that vaccination has caused" the clots and it was "firmly convinced" of the vaccine's benefits. from what data was released, health experts said that it does not appear that the incidents exceeded what would be expected in the general population -- germany, for example, said it was investigating seven incidents out of 1.6 million people who received the vaccine there. the w.h.o., too, has urged countries to continue with the vaccination program. the f.d.a. has indicated that it wants to see results from astrazeneca's ongoing u.s. trial before considering the vaccine for emergency use authorization. judging by previous approval processes, we are at least one month, if not more, away from the earliest possible date for giving americans shots of the astrazeneca vaccine. that would be late april or even may -- when there will be plenty of pfizer, moderna and johnson & johnson vaccines for american adults. the rocky rollout of the astrazeneca vaccine affirms the importance of proper trials like the one in the united states. but that doesn't mean we also have to keep all the doses to ourselves. in the meantime, south america is experiencing a resurgence of cases, and only about 5 percent of the continent's population has received any vaccine. the number is less than 1 percent for all of africa.  to make this inequality worse, new variants are further threatening these countries, with unwelcome news recently that the b.1.1.7 variant, first identified in britain, may be more lethal in addition to being more transmissible, and is now spreading around the world. lab and real-world evidence suggest that vaccines provide substantial protection against b.1.1.7, but that is cold comfort to those who lack them. worse, higher transmissibility, which makes it harder to hold the line with masking and distancing, renders distributing vaccines as soon as possible even more crucial. when facing an exponential threat like a more transmissible variant, a vaccine in arms today is much more valuable than one in a few months. besides providing astrazeneca vaccine doses, we should immediately consider transferring even more doses of the other vaccines, too. the united states overbooked vaccines early because we didn't know which ones would work and how many would be delivered. now we do, so it's time to adjust. we already have 100 million doses ordered from the american company novavax; its british trial has just concluded, and it is expected to apply for emergency authorization in the united states soon. we won't need most of those either, not this round. another advantage we have is that the united states makes its vaccines here, and the biden administration has, wisely, looked to increase manufacturing capacity and thus supply. the white house brokered a deal recently between merck and johnson & johnson to use merck plants in the united states to produce more of the latter's vaccine, and reportedly put in hundreds of millions of public dollars to upgrade merck's facilities as needed. that's great, and puts our supply even further beyond our needs. the johnson & johnson vaccine is easily stored and requires only a single dose, making it a valuable tool in hard-to-reach areas around the world. we should let some of those doses go as well. one argument for holding on to all the vaccines here seems to be a version of "better safe than sorry," that it's preferable to have an excess rather than a shortage. this isn't right or moral when so many countries can't even vaccinate their health care workers, and besides, our excess is practically guaranteed at this point. it's true that we may need to manufacture and distribute boosters that are even more effective against the variants, perhaps as early as this year, but that's for the future, and our supply of old variant astrazeneca won't help us there. another concern that comes up is that we may need some of those vaccines for children. but the earliest timeline for that is this fall for those 12 to 16 and next year for younger kids, as their trial has just begun. hoarding vaccines for potential uses beyond our need in the next six months isn't defensible, especially since we should keep increasing capacity to make more. letting our excess doses do some good in the world now is also smart politically after the previous administration did so little to engender good will around the world. while the united states is holding on to more vaccine doses than it needs, china and russia have been engaging in "vaccine diplomacy" -- distributing vaccines as part of their political outreach. at the same time, chinese state media outlets and, reportedly, russian-government-linked sources have been casting baseless doubts on western vaccines. while president biden is clearly aware of the weight of history and is said to have modeled the initial days of his presidency after franklin roosevelt's first 100 days, a more enduring legacy may be hinted at in roosevelt's last address to the american people. "the brotherly spirit of science," he said, citing thomas jefferson, "unites into one family all its votaries of whatever grade, and however widely dispersed throughout the different quarters of the globe." the vaccines are a gift of that spirit of science to the world. mr. biden's legacy will surely include not just how he oversees the outstanding campaign to vaccinate americans but also how his administration steps up to help vaccinate the rest of the planet against this scourge. along with doing whatever we can to increase vaccine supply globally, we should let our excess doses go where they're desperately needed, without waiting another day.
